Portable Systems Group

NT OS/2 Kernel Specification

Author: David N. Cutler,
Bryan M. Willman

Original Draft 1.0, March 8, 1989

Revision 1.1, March 16, 1989

Revision 1.2, March 29, 1989

Revision 1.3, April 18, 1989

Revision 1.4, May 4, 1989

Revision 1.5, May 8, 1989

Revision 1.6, August 14, 1989

Revision 1.7, November 15, 1989

Revision 1.8, November 16, 1989

Revision 1.9, November 17, 1989

Revision 1.10, January 6, 1990

Revision 1.11, June 6, 1990

Revision 1.12, September 19, 1990

Revision 1.13, March 11, 1991

Revision 1.14, May 2, 1991

Revision 1.15, May 28, 1991

Revision 1.16, June 18, 1991

Revision 1.17, August 7, 1991

Revision 1.18, August 8, 1991

.Begin Table C.

1. Overview 1

1.1 Kernel Execution Environment 1

1.2 Kernel Use of Hardware Priority Levels 2

1.3 Primary Kernel Data Structures 3

1.4 Multiprocessor Synchronization 4

1.4.1 Executive Multiprocessor Synchronization 6

1.4.1.1 Acquire Executive Spin Lock 6

1.4.1.2 Release Executive Spin Lock 7

1.5 Dispatching 7

1.5.1 Dispatcher Database 8

1.5.2 Idle Thread 8

2. Kernel Objects 9

2.1 Dispatcher Objects 9

2.1.1 Event Object 9

2.1.1.1 Initialize Event 11

2.1.1.2 Pulse Event 11

2.1.1.3 Read State Event 12

2.1.1.4 Reset Event 12

2.1.1.5 Set Event 12

2.1.2 Mutual Exclusion Objects 13

2.1.2.1 Mutant Object 14

2.1.2.1.1 Initialize Mutant 14

2.1.2.1.2 Read State Mutant 15

2.1.2.1.3 Release Mutant 15

2.1.2.2 Mutex Object 16

2.1.2.2.1 Initialize Mutex 17

2.1.2.2.2 Read State Mutex 17

2.1.2.2.3 Release Mutex 18

2.1.2.2.4 Mutex Contention Data 19

2.1.3 Semaphore Object 19

2.1.3.1 Initialize Semaphore 20

2.1.3.2 Read State Semaphore 20

2.1.3.3 Release Semaphore 20

2.1.4 Thread Object 21

2.1.4.1 Initialize Thread 24

2.1.4.2 Alert Thread 26

2.1.4.3 Alert and Resume Thread 27

2.1.4.4 Confine Thread 27

2.1.4.5 Delay Execution 28

2.1.4.6 Disable Queuing of APCs 29

2.1.4.7 Enable Queuing of APCs 29

2.1.4.8 Force Resumption of Thread 30

2.1.4.9 Freeze Thread 30

2.1.4.10 Query Data Alignment Mode 31

2.1.4.11 Query Base Priority 32

2.1.4.12 Read State Thread 32

2.1.4.13 Ready Thread 32

2.1.4.14 Resume Thread 33

2.1.4.15 Rundown Thread 33

2.1.4.16 Set Affinity Thread 34

2.1.4.17 Set Data Alignment Mode 34

2.1.4.18 Set Base Priority 35

2.1.4.19 Set Priority Thread 35

2.1.4.20 Suspend Thread 36

2.1.4.21 Terminate Thread 37

2.1.4.22 Test Alert Thread 37

2.1.4.23 Unfreeze Thread 38

2.1.4.24 Thread Performance Data 39

2.1.5 Timer Object 39

2.1.5.1 Initialize Timer 39

2.1.5.2 Cancel Timer 40

2.1.5.3 Read State Timer 40

2.1.5.4 Set Timer 40

2.2 Control Objects 41

2.2.1 Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC) Object 41

2.2.1.1 Initialize APC 43

2.2.1.2 Flush Queue APC 45

2.2.1.3 Insert Queue APC 46

2.2.1.4 Remove Queue APC 47

2.2.2 Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) Object 47

2.2.2.1 Initialize DPC 48

2.2.2.2 Insert Queue DPC 49

2.2.2.3 Remove Queue DPC 49

2.2.3 Device Queue Object 50

2.2.3.1 Initialize Device Queue 51

2.2.3.2 Insert Device Queue 51

2.2.3.3 Insert By Key Device Queue 52

2.2.3.4 Remove Device Queue 52

2.2.3.5 Remove Entry Device Queue 53

2.2.4 Interrupt Object 54

2.2.4.1 Initialize Interrupt 55

2.2.4.2 Connect Interrupt 58

2.2.4.3 Disconnect Interrupt 58

2.2.4.4 Synchronize Execution 59

2.2.5 Power Notify Object 60

2.2.5.1 Initialize Power Notify 61

2.2.5.2 Insert Power Notify 61

2.2.5.3 Remove Power Notify 62

2.2.6 Power Status Object 62

2.2.6.1 Initialize Power Status 63

2.2.6.2 Insert Power Status 63

2.2.6.3 Remove Power Status 64

2.2.7 Process Object 64

2.2.7.1 Initialize Process 65

2.2.7.2 Attach Process 66

2.2.7.3 Detach Process 67

2.2.7.4 Exclude Process 67

2.2.7.5 Include Process 68

2.2.7.6 Set Priority Process 68

2.2.7.7 Process Accounting Data 69

2.2.8 Profile Object 69

2.2.8.1 Initialize Profile 70

2.2.8.2 Start Profile 70

2.2.8.3 Stop Profile 71

2.2.8.4 Set System Profile Interval 71

2.2.8.5 Query System Profile Interval 72

3. Wait Operations 72

3.1 Wait For Multiple Objects 73

3.2 Wait For Single Object 75

4. Miscellaneous Operations 77

4.1 Bug Check 77

4.2 Context Frame Manipulation 78

4.2.1 Move Machine State To Context Frame 78

4.2.2 Move Machine State From Context Frame 79

4.3 Fill Entry Translation Buffer 80

4.4 Flush Data Cache 81

4.5 Flush Entire Translation Buffer 82

4.6 Flush Instruction Cache 82

4.7 Flush I/O Buffers 83

4.8 Flush Single Translation Buffer Entry 84

4.9 Freeze Execution 86

4.10 Get Current APC Environment 86

4.11 Get Current IRQL 86

4.12 Get Previous Mode 86

4.13 Lower IRQL 87

4.14 Query System Time 87

4.15 Raise IRQL 87

4.16 Run Down Thread 88

4.17 Set System Time 88

4.18 Stall Execution 89

4.19 Unfreeze Execution 89

5. Intel x86 Specific Functions. 90

5.1 Load an Ldt for a process. 90

5.2 Set and Entry in a Process's Ldt. 90

5.3 Get an Entry from a Thread's Gdt. 91

.End Table C.

1. Overview

This specification describes the kernel layer of the NT OS/2 operating
system. The kernel is responsible for thread dispatching, multiprocessor
synchronization, hardware exception handling, and the implementation of
low-level machine dependent functions.

The kernel is used by the executive layer of the system to synchronize
its activities and to implement the higher levels of abstraction that
are exported in user-level API's.

Generally speaking, the kernel does not implement any policy since this
is the province of the executive. However, there are some places where
policy decisions are made by the kernel. These include the way in which
thread priority is manipulated to maximize responsiveness to dispatching
events (e.g., the input of a character from a keyboard).

The kernel executes entirely in kernel mode and is nonpageable. It
guards access to critical data by raising the processor Interrupt
Request Level (IRQL) to an appropriate level and then acquiring a spin
lock.

The primary functions provided by the kernel include:

o Support of kernel objects

o Trap handling and exception dispatching

o Interrupt handling and dispatching

o Multiprocessor coordination and context switching

o Power failure recovery

o Miscellaneous hardware-specific functions

It is estimated that the kernel will be less than 48k bytes of resident
nonpageable code exclusive of the IEEE exception handling code.

1.1 Kernel Execution Environment

The kernel executes in the most privileged processor mode, usually at an
Interrupt Request Level (IRQL) of DISPATCH_LEVEL. The most privileged
processor mode is termed kernel mode.

\ On the N10 and the x86 architectures the most privileged processor
mode is called supervisor mode. However, in other architectures (e.g.,
MIPS), the most privileged processor mode is not called supervisor mode.
Furthermore, still other architectures include a supervisor mode, but it
is not the most privileged mode. Therefore, since it is intended that NT
OS/2 be portable and capable of running across several architectures,
the most privileged processor mode will be referred to as kernel mode. \

The kernel can execute simultaneously on all processors in a
multiprocessor configuration and synchronize access to critical regions
as appropriate.

Software within the kernel is not preemptible and, therefore, cannot be
context switched, whereas all software outside the kernel is almost
always preemptible and context switchable. In general, executive
software outside the kernel is not allowed to raise the IRQL above
APC_LEVEL. However, device drivers and executive spin lock
synchronization are exceptions to this rule.

The kernel is not pageable and cannot take page faults.

Software within the kernel is written in C and assembly language.
Assembly language is used for:

o Trap handling

o Spin locks

o Context switching

o Interval timer interrupt

o Power failure interrupt

o Interprocessor interrupt

o I/O Interrupt dispatching

o Machine check processing

o Asynchronous Procedure Call dispatching

o Deferred Procedure Call dispatching

o A small piece of thread startup

o A small piece of system initialization

It is estimated that the number of lines of assembly code within the
kernel will be less than 3k.

1.2 Kernel Use of Hardware Priority Levels

Hardware Interrupt Request Levels (IRQL's) are used to prioritize the
execution of the various kernel components. IRQL's are hierarchically
ordered and each distinct level disables interrupts on lower levels
while the respective level is active. The IRQL is raised when hardware
and software interrupt requests are granted and by the kernel when
synchronization with the possible occurrence of an interrupt is desired.

The kernel uses the hardware Interrupt Request Levels (IRQL's) as
follows:

LOW_LEVEL - Thread execution

APC_LEVEL - Asynchronous Procedure Call interrupt

DISPATCH_LEVEL - Dispatch and Deferred Procedure Call interrupt

WAKE_LEVEL - Wake system debugger interrupt

Device levels - Device interrupts

CLOCK2_LEVEL - Interval timer clock interrupt

IPI_LEVEL - Interprocessor interrupt

POWER_LEVEL - Power failure interrupt

HIGH_LEVEL - Machine check and bus error interrupts

The level LOW_LEVEL is reserved for normal thread execution and enables
all other interrupts.

The levels APC_LEVEL and DISPATCH_LEVEL are software interrupts and are
requested only by the kernel itself. They are located below all hardware
interrupt priority levels.

The level WAKE_LEVEL may or may not be present depending on the host
hardware configuration and capabilities. It is intended for use in
notifying the kernel debugger.

Device interrupt levels are generally placed between the levels
WAKE_LEVEL and CLOCK2_LEVEL.

The levels CLOCK2_LEVEL, IPI_LEVEL, POWER_LEVEL, AND HIGH_LEVEL are the
highest priority levels and are the most time critical.

\ The exact specification of interrupt levels is dependent on the host
system architecture. The above discussion only defines the importance of
the various levels, and does not attempt to assign a numeric value of
each level. \

1.3 Primary Kernel Data Structures

The primary kernel data structures include:

o Interrupt Dispatch Table (IDT) - This is a software maintained table
that associates an interrupt source with an Interrupt Service Routine
(ISR).

o Processor Control Registers (PCR's) - This is a set of four registers
that appear in the same physical address on each processor in a
multiprocessor configuration. These registers hold a pointer to the
Processor Control Block (PRCB), a pointer to the current thread's Thread
Environment Block (TEB), a pointer to the currently active thread, and a
temporary location used by the trap handler to save the contents of the
stack pointer. On a single processor implementation the PCR is located
in main memory.

o Processor Control Block (PRCB) - This structure holds per processor
information such as a pointer to the next thread selected for execution
on the respective processor. There is a PRCB for each processor in a
multiprocessor configuration. The address of this structure can always
be obtained from a fixed virtual address on any processor.

o An array of pointers to PRCB's - This array is used to address the
PRCB of another processor. It is used when another processor must be
interrupted to performed some desired operation.

o Kernel objects - These are the data abstractions that are necessary to
control processor execution and synchronization (e.g., thread object,
mutex object, etc.). Functions are provided to initialize and manipulate
these objects in a synchronized fashion.

o Dispatcher database - This is the database that is required to record
the execution state of processors and threads. It is used by the thread
dispatcher to schedule the execution of threads on processors.

o Timer queue - This is a list of timers that are due to expire at some
future point in time. The timer queue is actually implemented as a splay
tree (nearly balanced binary tree maintained by splay transformations).

o Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) queue - This is a list of requests to
call a specified procedure when the IRQL falls below DISPATCH_LEVEL.

o Power restoration notify and status queues - These are lists of power
notify and status objects that are to be acted upon if power fails and
is later restored without the contents of volatile memory being lost.

1.4 Multiprocessor Synchronization

At various stages during its execution, the kernel must guarantee that
one, and only one, processor at a time is active within a given critical
region. This is necessary to prevent code executing on one processor
from simultaneously accessing and modifying data that is being accessed
and modified from another processor. The mechanism by which this is
achieved is called a spin lock.

Spin locks are used when mutual exclusion must exist across all
processors and context switching cannot take place. A spin lock takes
its name from the fact that, while waiting on the spin lock, software
continually tries to gain entry to a critical region and makes no
progress until it succeeds.

Spin locks are implemented with a test and set operation on a lock
variable. When software executes a test and set operation and finds the
previous state of the lock variable free, entry to the associated
critical region is granted. If, however, the previous state of the lock
variable is busy, then the test and set operation on the lock variable
is simply repeated until the previous state is found to be free.

\ The exact instructions that are used to implement spin locks are
processor architecture specific. In most architectures the test and set
operation is not repeated continuously, but rather once finding the lock
busy, ordinary instructions are used to poll the lock until it is free.
Another test and set operation is then performed to retest the lock.
This guarantees a minimum of bus contention during spin lock sequences.
\

Spin locks can only be operated on from a safe interrupt request level.
This means that any attempt to acquire a particular spin lock must be at
the highest IRQL from which any other attempt to acquire the same spin
lock could be made on the same processor. If this restriction were not
followed, then deadlock could occur when code running at a lower IRQL
acquired a spin lock and then was interrupted by a higher-level
interrupt whose Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) also attempted to
acquire the spin lock.

The kernel uses various spin locks to synchronize access to the objects
and data structures it supports. These include:

o Dispatcher Database - The dispatcher database describes the scheduling
state of the system. Whenever a change is made to the dispatching state
of the system (e.g., the occurrence of an event), the dispatcher
database spin lock must be acquired at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL.

o Power Restoration Notify Queue - The power restoration notify queue
enables a device driver to be asynchronously notified when power is
restored after a failure. Whenever an insertion or removal is made
to/from this queue, the power notify queue spin lock must be acquired at
IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL.

o Power Restoration Status Queue - The power restoration status queue
provides the capability to have a specified boolean variable set to a
value of TRUE when power is restored after a failure. Whenever an
insertion or removal is made to/from this queue, the power status queue
spin lock must be acquired at IRQL POWER_LEVEL.

o Device Queues - A device queue is used to pass an I/O Request Packet
(IRP) between a thread and a device driver. Whenever an insertion or
removal is made to/from a device queue, the associated device queue spin
lock must be acquired at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL.

o Interrupts - Each connected interrupt object has a spin lock that
prevents the associated Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) from executing
at the same time as other device driver code that accesses the same
device resources. Whenever an interrupt occurs and the ISR executes, the
associated spin lock must be acquired at the IRQL of the interrupting
source. Likewise, device driver code must acquire the associated spin
lock at the IRQL of the interrupting source when synchronization with
the ISR is required.

o Processor Request Queue - Each processor has a request queue that is
used by other processors to signal an action to be performed. Whenever
an entry is inserted into or removed from this queue, the associated
processor request queue spin lock must be acquired at IRQL IPI_LEVEL.

o Kernel Debugger - The kernel debugger is used to debug the kernel
which can be in execution on several processors simultaneously. Whenever
the debugger is entered, the kernel debugger spin lock must be acquired
at IRQL HIGH_LEVEL.

/ The actual implementation of spin locks may be optimized in a
uniprocessor system. This could be done by either generating the system
specifically for a uniprocessor system with conditionalized code or by
dynamically modifying the code at boot time such that only IRQL is used
to synchronize kernel execution. /

1.4.1 Executive Multiprocessor Synchronization

Executive software outside the kernel also has the requirement to
synchronize access to resources in a multiprocessor environment. Unlike
the kernel, however, executive software can use kernel dispatcher
objects (e.g., mutexes, semaphores, events, etc.), as well as spin
locks, to implement mutually exclusive access.

Kernel dispatcher objects allow the processor to be redispatched
(context switched) and should be used when the wait or access time to a
resource is liable to be lengthy (e.g. greater than 25 microseconds on
an i860). Spin locks should be used when the wait or access time to a
resource is short and does not involve complicated interactions with
other code.

Executive spin locks could cause serious maintenance problems if not
used judiciously. In particular, no deadlock protection is performed and
dispatching is disabled while the executive owns a spin lock. Therefore,
certain rules must be followed by executive software when using spin
locks:

1. The code within a critical region that is guarded by an executive
spin lock must not be pageable and must not make any references to
pageable data.

2. An executive spin lock can only be acquired from IRQL's 0, APC_LEVEL,
and DISPATCH_LEVEL.

3. The code within a critical region that is guarded by an executive
spin lock cannot call any external procedures, nor can it generate any
software conditions or hardware exceptions.

Programming interfaces that support executive spin locks include:

KeAcquireSpinLock - Acquire an executive spin lock

KeReleaseSpinLock - Release an executive spin lock.

1.4.1.1 Acquire Executive Spin Lock

An executive spin lock can be acquired with the KeAcquireSpinLock
function:

VOID

KeAcquireSpinLock (

IN PKSPIN_LOCK SpinLock,

OUT PKIRQL OldIrql

);

Parameters:

SpinLock - A pointer to an executive spin lock.

OldIrql - A pointer to a variable that receives the previous IRQL.

The previous IRQL is saved in the OldIrql parameter, the current IRQL is
raised to DISPATCH_LEVEL, and the specified spin lock is acquired. The
previous IRQL value must be specified when the spin lock is released.

1.4.1.2 Release Executive Spin Lock

An executive spin lock can be released with the KeReleaseSpinLock
function:

VOID

KeReleaseSpinLock (

IN PKSPIN_LOCK SpinLock,

IN KIRQL OldIrql

);

Parameters:

SpinLock - A pointer to an executive spin lock.

OldIrql - The IRQL at which the executive spin lock was acquired.

The specified spin lock is released and the current IRQL is set to the
specified value.

1.5 Dispatching

The kernel dispatches threads for execution according to their software
priority level.

There are 32 levels of thread priority which are split into two classes:

o Realtime

o Variable

The priority of threads within the realtime priority class is not
altered by the kernel. However, as quantum end events occur, the threads
within a level are round robin scheduled.

The priority of threads within the variable priority class is altered by
the kernel, dependent on the execution profile of the respective
threads. At each quantum end event, the priority of the executing thread
is decremented and a decision is made as to whether it should be
preempted by another thread. If it should be preempted to execute a
higher priority thread, then a context switch occurs. When a thread in
the variable priority class transitions from a Waiting state to a Ready
state, it is given a priority boost that is dependent on the type of
event that caused the Wait to be satisifed. If the event was keyboard
input, for instance, the thread would get a large boost. However, if the
event was file I/O it would be given a smaller boost.

When a thread is readied for execution, an attempt is made to dispatch
the thread on an idle processor. If an idle processor can be selected,
then preference is given to the last processor on which the thread
executed.

If an idle processor is not available, then an attempt is made to find a
processor that should be preempted. This determination is made using the
active summary and the active matrix (these structures are described in
the following two sections). If an appropriate processor is located,
then preference is given to the last processor on which the thread
executed.

If no processor can be preempted to execute the ready thread, the thread
is inserted at the end of the ready queue selected by its priority and
the ready summary is updated.

Giving preference to the last processor a thread executed on maximizes
the chances there is still thread data in the respective processor's
secondary cache.

1.5.1 Dispatcher Database

The kernel maintains several data structures to aid in choosing which
threads should be active at any instance in time. These structures
include:

o Ready queues - There is a ready queue for each software priority
level. Each queue contains a list of threads that are ready to execute
at that level.

o Ready summary - A set that contains a TRUE member for each ready queue
that contains one or more threads.

o Active matrix - The active matrix is a two-dimensional array that
represents a set of processors for each of the software priority levels.
A member is TRUE in the matrix if a processor is executing a thread at
the corresponding priority level.

o Active summary - A set that contains a TRUE member for each priority
class that has one or more processors executing threads at that level.

o Idle summary - A set that contains a TRUE member for each processor
that is currently idle.

o Idle thread - A thread that is run when no other thread is available
to execute on a processor.

The ready summary is used to quickly locate a thread to execute when the
currently executing thread is terminated or transitions to a Waiting
state.

The active summary is used to quickly determine if preemption should
occur when a thread transitions to a Ready state.

/ Since this determination is simple in a uniprocessor system, the
active summary and active matrix are only kept up to date and used on
configurations with multiple processors. /

1.5.2 Idle Thread

Each processor has an idle thread that can always execute. The idle
thread has a stack that is capable of nesting all interrupts and a
software priority that is below that of all other thread priority
levels.

The idle thread is selected for execution when no other thread is
available to execute. The idle thread executes at DISPATCH_LEVEL and
continually loops looking for work that has been assigned to its
processor. This work includes processing the Deferred Procedure Call
(DPC) queue and initiating a context switch when another thread is
selected for execution on the respective processor.

While an idle thread executes, the member in the idle summary selected
by its processor number is TRUE. This enables the kernel to quickly
determine which processors are executing idle threads.

2. Kernel Objects

The kernel exports a set of abstractions to the executive layer which
are called kernel objects. Kernel objects are represented by a control
block that describes the contents of each object. Kernel objects are
used by the executive layer to construct more complex objects that are
exported in user level API's.

There are two types of kernel objects:

1. Dispatcher objects

2. Control objects

Dispatcher objects have a signal state (Signaled or Not-Signaled) and
control the dispatching and synchronization of system operations. These
objects include the event, mutant, mutex, semaphore, thread, and timer
objects. Dispatcher objects can be specified as arguments to the kernel
Wait functions.

Control objects are used to control the operation of the kernel but do
not affect dispatching or synchronization. These objects include the
Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC), Deferred Procedure Call (DPC), device
queue, interrupt, power notify, power status, process, and profile
objects.

The kernel neither allocates nor deallocates kernel object storage. It
is the responsibility of the executive layer to allocate an appropriate
data structure and call the kernel to initialize a specific kernel
object type.

The kernel exports kernel object types to the executive layer so the
executive can allocate appropriately sized data structures and can
access various read only data items (e.g., linkage pointers).

The executive is not allowed to manipulate the writeable data portion of
kernel objects directly. Various interfaces are provided by the kernel
to perform this type of operation.

Kernel objects are referenced by pointers to the respective data
structures. It is the responsibility of the executive layer to
synchronize the deallocation of kernel object storage such that the
kernel does not access an object after its storage has been deleted.

2.1 Dispatcher Objects

This section describes the various types of dispatcher objects and the
interfaces that are provided to manipulate these objects.

2.1.1 Event Object

An event object is used to record the occurrence of an event and
synchronize it with some action that is to be performed.

There are two types of event objects:

o synchronization

o notification

A synchronization event object is used when it is desirable for a single
waiter to continue execution when the event is set to the Signaled
state. The state of a synchronization event object is automatically
reset to the Not-Signaled state when a Wait for the event object is
satisfied.

Synchronization events provide an optimal way to implement mutual
exclusion at user level. An identical capability can be implemented
using binary semaphores, but requires calling the system each time
mutual exclusion is desired.

Synchronization events can also be used to provide synchronization in
producer/consumer relationships where it is otherwise undesirable to use
a counting semaphore.

A notification event is used when it is desirable for all waiters to
continue execution when the event is set to the Signaled state. The
state of a notification event object is not altered when a Wait for the
event object is satisfied and remains Signaled until it is explicitly
reset to the Not-Signaled state.

Notification events can be used to implement resource allocators where
there is not a one-to-one relationship between the release of a resource
and the allocation of the resource (e.g. a memory allocator).

Waiting on an event object causes the execution of the subject thread to
be suspended until the event object attains a state of Signaled.

Satisfying the Wait for a synchronization event object automatically
causes the state of the event object to be reset to the Not-Signaled
state.

Satisfying the Wait for a notification event object does not cause the
state of the event object to change. Therefore, when a notification
event object attains a state of Signaled, an attempt is made to satisfy
as many Waits as possible.

The state of an event object is controlled by a count value that is
incremented each time the event object is set to the Signaled state.
Thus, the state of the event object is Signaled when the count value is
nonzero and Not-Signaled when the count value is zero.

The count value indicates the number of times that the event object has
been set to a Signaled state since the last time it was reset to the
Not-Signaled state.

Programming interfaces that support the event object include:

KeInitializeEvent - Initialize an event object

KePulseEvent - Set/reset event object state atomically

KeReadStateEvent - Read state of event object

KeResetEvent - Set event object to Not-Signaled state

KeSetEvent - Set event object to Signaled state

2.1.1.1 Initialize Event

An event object can be initialized with the KeInitializeEvent function:

VOID

KeInitializeEvent (

IN PKEVENT Event,

IN EVENT_TYPE EventType,

IN BOOLEAN State

);

Parameters:

Event - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type event.

EventType - The event type (NotificationEvent or SynchronizationEvent).

State - The initial state of the event.

The event object data structure for the specified event type is
initialized with the specified initial state.

2.1.1.2 Pulse Event

An event object can be atomically set to a Signaled state and then reset
to a Not-Signaled state with the KePulseEvent function:

LONG

KePulseEvent (

IN PKEVENT Event,

IN KPRIORITY Increment,

IN BOOLEAN Wait

);

Parameters:

Event - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type event.

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied if setting the
event causes a Wait to be satisfied.

Wait - A boolean value that specifies whether the call to KePulseEvent
will be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the kernel Wait
functions.

The function atomically sets the state of the event object to Signaled,
attempts to satisfy as many Waits as possible for the event object, and
then resets the state of the event object to Not-Signaled.

The previous state of the event object is returned as the function
value. If the previous state of the event object was Signaled, then a
nonzero count value is returned. Otherwise, a value of zero is returned.

If the wait parameter is TRUE, then the return to the caller is executed
without lowering IRQL or releasing the dispatcher database spin lock.
Thus the call to KePulseEvent MUST be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to
one of the kernel Wait functions. This capability is provided to allow
the executive to set an event and Wait as one atomic operation which
prevents a possible superfluous context switch.

2.1.1.3 Read State Event

The current state of an event object can be read with the
KeReadStateEvent function:

LONG

KeReadStateEvent (

IN PKEVENT Event

);

Parameters:

Event - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type event.

The current state of the event object is returned as the function value.
If the current state of the event object is Signaled, then a nonzero
count value is returned. Otherwise, a value of zero is returned.

2.1.1.4 Reset Event

An event object can be reset to a Not-Signaled state with the
KeResetEvent function:

LONG

KeResetEvent (

IN PKEVENT Event

);

Parameters:

Event - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type event.

The previous state of the event object is returned as the function value
and the state of the event object is reset to Not-Signaled (i.e., the
count value is set to zero). If the previous state of the event object
was Signaled, then a nonzero count value is returned. Otherwise, a value
of zero is returned.

2.1.1.5 Set Event

An event object can be set to a Signaled state with the KeSetEvent
function:

LONG

KeSetEvent (

IN PKEVENT Event,

IN KPRIORITY Increment,

IN BOOLEAN Wait

);

Parameters:

Event - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type event.

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied if setting the
event causes a Wait to be satisfied.

Wait - A boolean value that specifies whether the call to KeSetEvent
will be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the kernel Wait
functions.

The previous state of the event object is returned as the function value
and the state of the event is set to Signaled (i.e., the count value is
incremented). If the previous state of the event object was Signaled,
then a nonzero count value is returned. Otherwise, a value of zero is
returned.

Setting an event object causes the event to attain a Signaled state, and
therefore, an attempt is made to satisfy as many Waits as possible for
the event object.

If the Wait parameter is TRUE, then the return to the caller is executed
without lowering IRQL or releasing the dispatcher database spinlock.
Thus the call to KeSetEvent MUST be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to
one of the kernel Wait functions. This capability is provided to allow
the executive to set an event and Wait as one atomic operation which
prevents a possible superfluous context switch.

2.1.2 Mutual Exclusion Objects

The kernel provides two objects for controlling mutually exclusive
access to a resource; the mutant object and the mutex object.

The mutant object is intended for use in providing a user mode mutual
exclusion mechanism that has ownership semantics, but it can also be
used in kernel mode.

The mutex object can only be used in kernel mode and is intended to
provide a deadlock-free mutual exclusion mechanism with ownership and
other special system semantics.

The state of mutant and mutex objects is controlled by a count. When the
count is one, the mutant or mutex object is in the Signaled state, the
mutant or mutex object is not owned, and exclusive access to the
corresponding resource can be obtained by specifying the mutant or mutex
object in a kernel Wait function. When the count is not one, the mutant
or mutex object is in the Not-Signaled state and any attempt to acquire
the mutant or mutex object will cause the subject thread to wait until
the mutant or mutex object count is one.

Mutant and mutex objects are similar in that they both provide mutual
exclusion mechanisms with recursive ownership capability. They have
significant differences, however, which dictate the support of two
separate object types. These differences include the following:

o Mutex objects have a level number which is used to prevent deadlock,
whereas mutant objects have no level number.

o Mutant objects have an abandoned status and can be released by a
thread other than the owner, whereas mutex objects do not have an
abandoned status and can only be released by the owner thread.

o Owning a mutex object prevents the owning thread's process from
leaving the balance set, whereas owning a mutant object does not affect
the swapability of the parent process.

o Owning a mutex object causes the priority of the owning thread to be
raised to the greater of its current priority and the lowest realtime
priority, whereas owning a mutant object does not affect the owner
thread's priority in any way.

o Owning a mutex object prevents the delivery of kernel mode APCs,
whereas owning a mutant object does not affect the delivery of kernel
mode APCs.

2.1.2.1 Mutant Object

Waiting on (acquiring) a mutant object causes the execution of the
subject thread to be suspended until the mutant object attains a state
of Signaled. Satisfying the Wait for a mutant object causes the state of
the mutant object to become Not-Signaled.

Threads are allowed to recursively acquire mutant objects that they
already own. A recursively acquired mutant object must be released the
same number of times it was acquired before it will again attain the
state of Signaled.

Mutant objects can be exported to user mode for providing a mutual
exclusion mechanism with ownership semantics.

Programming interfaces that support the mutant object include:

KeInitializeMutant - Initialize a mutant object

KeReadStateMutant - Read the state of a mutant object

KeReleaseMutant - Release ownership of a mutant object

2.1.2.1.1 Initialize Mutant

A mutant object can be initialized with the KeInitializeMutant function:

VOID

KeInitializeMutant (

IN PKMUTANT Mutant,

IN BOOLEAN InitialOwner

);

Parameters:

Mutant - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutant.

InitialOwner - A boolean variable that determines whether the current
thread is to be the initial owner of the mutant object.

If the value of the InitialOwner parameter is TRUE, then the mutant
object data structure is initialized with the current thread as the
owner and an initial state of Not-Signaled. Otherwise, the mutant object
data structure is initialized as unowned with an initial state of
Signaled.

2.1.2.1.2 Read State Mutant

The current state of a mutant object can be read with the
KeReadStateMutant function:

LONG

KeReadStateMutant (

IN PKMUTANT Mutant

);

Parameters:

Mutant - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutant.

The current state of the mutant object is returned as the function
value. If the return value is one, then the state of the mutant object
is Signaled. Otherwise, the state of the mutant object is Not-Signaled.

2.1.2.1.3 Release Mutant

A mutant object can be released with the KeReleaseMutant function:

LONG

KeReleaseMutant (

IN PKMUTANT Mutant,

IN KPRIORITY Increment,

IN BOOLEAN Abandoned,

IN BOOLEAN Wait

);

Parameters:

Mutant - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutant.

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied if releasing
the mutant object causes a Wait to be satisfied.

Abandoned - A boolean value that specifies whether the release of the
mutant object is to be forced.

Wait - A boolean variable that specifies whether the call to
KeReleaseMutant will be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the
kernel Wait functions.

If the value of the Abandoned parameter is TRUE, then the release of the
mutant object is unconditional and can be requested by a thread other
than the owner of the mutant object. The fact that the mutant object is
being abandoned is recorded in the mutant object and is returned by the
kernel Wait services when ownership of the mutant object is granted to
another thread. Once set, the abandoned status of a mutant object cannot
be cleared and is thereafter always returned by the kernel Wait
services.

If the value of the Abandoned parameter is FALSE, then only the owning
thread can release the mutant object. Any attempt to release the mutant
object made by a thread other than the owner, will cause an exception to
be raised. If the mutant object has previously been abandoned, then the
exception STATUS_ABANDONED is raised. Otherwise, the exception
STATUS_MUTANT_NOT_OWNED is raised.

The previous state of the mutant object is returned as the function
value.

If the value of the Abandoned parameter is TRUE, then the state of the
mutant object is set to Signaled and the return value is not meaningful.

If the value of the Abandoned parameter is FALSE, then the new state of
the mutant object can be determined by the value returned. If the
returned value is zero, then the mutant object was actually released and
attained a state of Signaled. Otherwise, the mutant object was not
released and still has a state of Not-Signaled (i.e., the mutant object
has been recursively acquired and has not yet been released the proper
number of times to cause it to attain a Signaled state).

If the mutant object attains a Signaled state, then an attempt is made
to satisfy a Wait for the mutant object.

If the mutant object attains a Signaled state and was previously owned
by a thread, then the mutant object is removed from the list of mutant
objects owned by the subject thread.

If the value of the Wait parameter is TRUE, then the return to the
caller is executed without lowering IRQL or releasing the dispatcher
database spin lock. Thus the call to KeReleaseMutant MUST be IMMEDIATELY
followed by a call to one of the kernel Wait functions. This capability
is provided to allow the executive to release a mutant object and Wait
as one atomic operation which prevents a possible superfluous context
switch.

2.1.2.2 Mutex Object

Waiting on (acquiring) a mutex object causes the execution of the
subject thread to be suspended until the mutex object attains a state of
Signaled. Satisfying the Wait for a mutex object causes the state of the
mutex object to become Not-Signaled and disables the delivery of normal
kernel APCs to the subject thread.

If the subject thread did not previously own any mutexes, then the
current execution priority of the thread is saved and then raised to the
maximum of its current priority and the lowest realtime priority. This
ensures that the thread will have a very high execution priority while
it executes in a critical section and prevents the effects of priority
inversion. When the thread releases the last mutex it owns, its priority
is restored to the saved value.

Mutex ownership also prevents the owning thread's process from being
removed from the balance set. If the balance set manager selects the
process for removal from the balance set, all threads within the process
that own mutexes will be allowed to continue execution until they no
longer own any mutexes. This ensures that access to critical resources
is not blocked because a thread belonging to a process that has been
removed from the balance set owns one or more mutexes.

Each mutex object has a level number. This level number is used to
prevent possible deadlock. When an attempt is made to acquire a mutex
object, the level number of the mutex object must be higher
(numerically) than the highest level number of any mutex object owned by
the subject thread. If this condition is not met, then a system bug
check occurs.

Level number checking is included mainly for debugging the system while
it is under development. It may or may not be conditionalized out in a
production system.

Threads are allowed to recursively acquire mutex objects that they
already own. For this case level number checking does not occur since
deadlock is not possible. A recursively acquired mutex object must be
released the same number of times it was acquired before it will again
attain the state of Signaled.

Mutex objects are not exported by the executive to user mode and are
only available for use by the executive layer itself. Furthermore, the
executive is not allowed to acquire a mutex object and then return to
user mode while retaining ownership of the mutex.

Programming interfaces that support the mutex object include:

KeInitializeMutex - Initialize a mutex object

KeReadStateMutex - Read state of mutex object

KeReleaseMutex - Release ownership of mutex object

2.1.2.2.1 Initialize Mutex

A mutex object can be initialized with the KeInitializeMutex function:

VOID

KeInitializeMutex (

IN PKMUTEX Mutex,

IN ULONG Level

);

Parameters:

Mutex - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutex.

Level - The level number that is to be assigned to the mutex.

The mutex object data structure is initialized with the specified level
number and an initial state of Signaled.

2.1.2.2.2 Read State Mutex

The current state of a mutex object can be read with the
KeReadStateMutex function:

LONG

KeReadStateMutex (

IN PKMUTEX Mutex

);

Parameters:

Mutex - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutex.

The current state of the mutex object is returned as the function value.
If the return value is one, then the state of the mutex object is
Signaled. Otherwise, the state of the mutex object is Not-Signaled.

2.1.2.2.3 Release Mutex

A mutex object can be released with the KeReleaseMutex function:

LONG

KeReleaseMutex (

IN PKMUTEX Mutex,

IN BOOLEAN Wait

);

Parameters:

Mutex - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type mutex.

Wait - A boolean variable that specifies whether the call to
KeReleaseMutex will be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the
kernel Wait functions.

The previous state of the mutex object is returned as the function
value. The state is returned as an integer value. If the returned value
is zero, then the mutex object was actually released and attained a
state of Signaled. Otherwise, the mutex object was not released and
still has a state of Not-Signaled (i.e the mutex object has been
recursively acquired and has not yet been released the proper number of
times to cause it to attain a Signaled state).

If the mutex object attains a Signaled state, then an attempt is made to
satisfy a Wait for the mutex object.

A mutex object can only be released by the subject thread that owns the
mutex. If an attempt is made to release a mutex that is not owned by the
subject thread, then a bug check will occur.

A mutex object can only be released if it is currently owned. An attempt
to release a mutex object whose current state is Signaled, will also
cause a bug check to occur.

If the mutex object attains a Signaled state, then the mutex object is
removed from the list of mutexes owned by the subject thread. If the
thread's owned mutex list does not contain any more entries, then the
thread's original priority is restored (the priority that was previously
saved) and a kernel APC is requested if the thread's kernel APC queue
contains one or more entries.

If the mutex object attains a Signaled state, the mutex was the last one
owned by the subject thread, and the thread's process has been selected
for removal from the balance set, then a new thread is selected for
execution, the subject thread is inserted into its process's ready
queue, and a context switch to the selected thread is performed. If no
other threads in the process own mutexes, then the balance set event is
set in the process object to notify the balance set manager that it can
remove the process from the balance set.

If the value of the Wait parameter is TRUE, then the return to the
caller is executed without lowering IRQL or releasing the dispatcher
database spin lock. Thus the call to KeReleaseMutex MUST be IMMEDIATELY
followed by a call to one of the kernel Wait functions. This capability
is provided to allow the executive to release a mutex and Wait as one
atomic operation which prevents a possible superfluous context switch.

2.1.2.2.4 Mutex Contention Data

Two counters are maintained for each mutex object to determine the
activity level of the mutex object and any contention that may occur.
One of the counters records the number of times the mutex object has
been acquired and the other the number of times an attempt to acquire
the mutex object resulted in the execution of the subject thread being
suspended.

2.1.3 Semaphore Object

A semaphore object is used to control access to a resource, but not
necessarily in a mutually exclusive fashion. A semaphore object acts as
a gate through which a variable number of threads may pass concurrently,
up to a specified limit. The gate is open (Signaled state) as long as
there are resources available. When the number of resources specified by
the limit are concurrently in use, the gate is closed (Not-Signaled
state).

The gating mechanism of a semaphore object is controlled by a count.
When the count is greater than zero, the semaphore object is in the
Signaled state, and one or more threads may pass through the gate by
specifying the semaphore in a kernel Wait function. When the count is
zero, the semaphore object is in the Not-Signaled state, the gate is
closed, and any attempt to pass through the gate will cause the subject
thread to Wait until the semaphore count is greater than zero.

Waiting on (acquiring) a semaphore object causes the execution of the
subject thread to be suspended until the semaphore object attains a
Signaled state. Satisfying the Wait for a semaphore object causes the
semaphore count to be decremented.

A semaphore object with a limit of one can be used to provide mutual
exclusion semantics since only one thread will be allowed to pass
through the gate concurrently. This is not, however, the same
functionality as provided by mutex objects since there is no ownership
(i.e., any thread can release the semaphore), there is no level number
checking (i.e., deadlock is not prevented), and the priority of the
subject thread is not raised (i.e., priority inversion problems can
arise).

A semaphore object with a limit of one can also be used as a
"synchronization" event provided the semaphore is never "over Signaled"
(i.e., no thread attempts to release the semaphore while it is already
in the Signaled state). For this case, the semaphore is normally in a
Not-Signaled state and is used to record the occurrence of an event by
releasing the semaphore. Waiting on the semaphore object suspends the
subject thread until the semaphore attains a Signaled state and causes
the semaphore to be immediately set to the Not-Signaled state.

Programming interfaces that support the semaphore object include:

KeInitializeSemaphore - Initialize a semaphore object

KeReadStateSemaphore - Read state of semaphore

KeReleaseSemaphore - Adjust semaphore object count

2.1.3.1 Initialize Semaphore

A semaphore object can be initialized with the KeInitializeSemaphore
function:

VOID

KeInitializeSemaphore (

IN PKSEMAPHORE Semaphore,

IN LONG Count,

IN LONG Limit

);

Parameters:

Semaphore - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type semaphore.

Count - The initial count value to be assigned to the semaphore. This
value must be positive.

Limit - The maximum count value that the semaphore can attain. This
value must be positive.

The semaphore object data structure is initialized with the specified
initial count and limit.

2.1.3.2 Read State Semaphore

The current state of a semaphore object can be read with the
KeReadStateSemaphore function:

LONG

KeReadStateSemaphore (

IN PKSEMAPHORE Semaphore

);

Parameters:

Semaphore - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type semaphore.

The current signal state of the semaphore object is returned as the
function value. If the return value is zero, then the current state of
the semaphore object is Not-Signaled. Otherwise, the current state of
the semaphore object is Signaled.

2.1.3.3 Release Semaphore

A semaphore object can be released with the KeReleaseSemaphore function:

LONG

KeReleaseSemaphore (

IN PKSEMAPHORE Semaphore,

IN KPRIORITY Increment,

IN LONG Adjustment,

IN BOOLEAN Wait

);

Parameters:

Semaphore - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type semaphore.

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied if releasing
the semaphore causes a Wait to be satisfied.

Adjustment - The value that is to be added to the current semaphore
count. This value must be positive.

Wait - A boolean value that specifies whether the call to
KeReleaseSemaphore will be IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the
kernel Wait functions.

Releasing a semaphore object causes the semaphore count to be augmented
by the value of the Adjustment parameter. If the resultant value is
greater than the limit of the semaphore object, then the count is not
adjusted and the exception STATUS_SEMAPHORE_COUNT_EXCEEDED is raised.

Augmenting the semaphore object count causes the semaphore to attain a
state of Signaled, and therefore, an attempt is made to satisfy as many
Waits as possible for the semaphore object.

The previous state of the semaphore object is returned as an integer
function value. If the return value is zero, then the previous state of
the semaphore object was Not-Signaled. Otherwise, the previous state of
the semaphore object was Signaled.

If the value of the wait parameter is TRUE, then the return to the
caller is executed without lowering IRQL or releasing the dispatcher
database spin lock. Thus the call to KeReleaseSemaphore MUST be
IMMEDIATELY followed by a call to one of the kernel Wait functions. This
capability is provided to allow the executive to release a semaphore and
Wait as one atomic operation which prevents a possible superfluous
context switch.

2.1.4 Thread Object

A thread object is the agent that executes program code and is
dispatched for execution by the kernel.

Each thread is associated with a process object which specifies the
virtual address space mapping for the thread and accumulates thread
execution time. Several thread objects can be associated with a single
process object which enables the concurrent execution of multiple
threads in a single address space (possibly simultaneous execution in a
multiprocessor system).

A thread executes in kernel and user mode, usually at IRQL 0, and is
dispatched for execution according to its software priority.

Although there is no actual difference, threads are usually referred to
as either user threads or system threads. A user thread executes mostly
in user mode and within the user part of the virtual address space. It
enters kernel mode only to execute system services. System threads
execute only in kernel mode and usually within the system part of the
virtual address space. There are some system threads, however, that also
use the user part of the address space to store information and execute
code from. An example of such a thread is a file system.

The context of a thread typically consists of the following:

o Integer registers

o Floating point registers

o Architecture-dependent special registers

o A user stack pointer

o A kernel stack pointer

o A program counter

o A processor status

o A floating point status

\ The exact context of a thread is host architecture dependent. \

Each thread has a set of processors on which it can execute. This is
referred to as the processor affinity. When a thread is initialized it
is given the processor affinity of its parent process. Thereafter, the
affinity of the thread can be set to any proper subset of the parent
process's affinity.

A thread can be in one of six dispatcher, or scheduling, states:

o Initialized

o Ready

o Standby

o Running

o Waiting

o Terminated

A thread enters the Initialized state when its thread object is
initialized. A thread in the Initialized state can transition only to
the Ready state.

A thread is in a Ready state when it is eligible to be selected for
execution on a processor. A thread in the Ready state is enqueued on the
dispatcher ready queue selected by its priority and can transition from
the Ready state to the Standby state.

A thread is in a Standby state when it has been selected to execute on a
processor, but the actual context switch to the thread has not yet
occurred. A thread in the Standby state can transition to the Ready and
Running states.

A thread is in a Running state when it is currently being executed by a
processor. A thread in the Running state can transition to the Ready,
Waiting, and Terminated states.

A thread is in a Waiting state when it is waiting for one or more
dispatcher objects to attain a state of Signaled. A thread in the
Waiting state can transition to the Ready state.

A thread in the Terminated state has completed its execution and the
corresponding thread object will be deleted by the executive at the
appropriate time.

/ Note that is possible to reuse a thread object that has a state of
Terminated by simply reinitializing the thread object which will cause
it to enter the Initialized state. /

A thread's parent process is either in the balance set (Included) or not
in the balance set (Excluded). The balance set is that set of processes
and threads that are currently eligible for being considered for
execution. Processes and threads that are not in the balance set are not
considered for execution until they reenter the balance set.

The balance set is managed by the balance set manager. In a single user
system there will be no balance set manager. Server systems, however,
present the problem of having to manage more processes than there is
space for in main memory without incurring excessive paging. Therefore,
the balance set manager is responsible for determining when excessive
paging is occurring and then selecting the appropriate processes to
remove from the balance set.

/ There may not be a balance set manager in the first release of NT
OS/2. We may rely instead on working set trimming to obtain necessary
memory when excessive paging levels are observed. /

A thread is dispatched for execution according to its software priority
level. Higher priority threads are given preference and preempt the
execution of lower priority threads.

There are two classes of priority: 1) realtime, and 2) variable. Each of
these classes contains several levels of thread priority.

In the realtime priority class, a thread executes at a priority level
selected by the user. The system makes no attempt to alter or boost the
priority as the thread executes and enters and leaves wait states. The
realtime priority levels are higher than all the levels in the variable
priority class. The realtime priority class is intended for use by
time-critical threads that require a response time that is guaranteed by
application design.

The variable priority class is where most threads execute. As a thread
executes and experiences quantum end events, its priority decays. When a
thread enters a Waiting state and is subsequently awakened, it is given
a priority boost that is commensurate with the importance of the event
that caused the Wait to be satisifed (e.g., a large boost is given for
the completion of keyboard input but a small one is given for completing
disk I/O). A thread therefore, runs at a high priority as long as it is
interactive. When it becomes compute bound, its priority rapidly decays,
and it is considered only after other, higher priority threads. In
addition, the kernel arbitrarily boosts the priority of threads that are
compute bound and haven't received any processor time for a given period
of time.

As a thread executes, performance and accounting data are collected for
the thread and for the thread's parent process.

Programming interfaces that support the thread object include:

KeInitializeThread - Initialize a thread object

KeAlertThread - Set thread alert for specified mode

KeAlertResumeThread - Alert and resume thread object

KeConfineThread - Confine thread object execution

KeDelayExecutionThread - Delay execution of thread object

KeDisableApcQueuingThread - Disable queuing of APCs

KeEnableApcQueuingThread - Enable queuing of APCs

KeForceResumeThread - Force resumption of thread execution

KeFreezeThread - Freeze thread object execution

KeQueryAutoAlignmentThread - Query alignment mode of thread object

KeQueryBasePriorityThread - Query base priority of thread object

KeReadStateThread - Read state of thread object

KeReadyThread - Ready thread object for execution

KeResumeThread - Resume thread object execution

KeRundownThread - Run down thread object

KeSetAffinityThread - Set thread object processor set

KeSetAutoAlignmentThread - Set alignment mode of thread object

KeSetBasePriorityThread - Set base priority of thread object

KeSetPriorityThread - Set priority of thread object

keSuspendThread - Suspend thread object exection

KeTerminateThread - Terminate thread object execution

KeTestAlertThread - Test if thread alerted for mode

KeUnfreezeThread - Unfreeze thread object execution

2.1.4.1 Initialize Thread

A thread object can be initialized with the KeInitializeThread function:

VOID

KeInitializeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN PVOID KernelStack,

IN PKSYSTEM_ROUTINE SystemRoutine,

IN PKSTART_ROUTINE StartRoutine OPTIONAL,

IN PVOID StartContext OPTIONAL,

IN PCONTEXT ContextFrame OPTIONAL,

IN PVOID Teb OPTIONAL,

IN PKPROCESS Process

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

KernelStack - A pointer to the base (highest address) of a kernel stack
on which the initial context for the thread is to be constructed.

SystemRoutine - A pointer to a function that is to called when the
thread is scheduled for execution. This routine performs executive
initialization.

StartRoutine - An optional pointer to a function that is to be called
after the executive has finished initializing the thread.

StartContext - A optional pointer to an arbitrary data structure which
will be passed to the StartRoutine function as a parameter.

ContextFrame - An optional pointer to a context frame which contains the
initial user mode state of the thread. This parameter is specified if
the thread will execute in user mode. If this parameter is not
specified, then the Teb parameter is ignored.

Teb - An optional pointer to the user mode thread environment block.
This parameter is ignored if the ContextFrame parameter is not
specified.

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

The function specified by the SystemRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKSYSTEM_ROUTINE) (

IN PKSTART_ROUTINE StartRoutine OPTIONAL,

IN PVOID StartContext OPTIONAL

);

Parameters:

StartRoutine - An optional pointer to a function that is to be called
after the executive has finished initializing the thread.

StartContext - A optional pointer to an arbitrary data structure which
will be passed to the StartRoutine function as a parameter.

The function specified by the StartRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKSTART_ROUTINE) (

IN PVOID StartContext

);

Parameters:

StartContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the thread object was initialized.

The thread object data structure is initialized and the thread's
dispatcher state is set to Initialized. The thread's quantum, affinity,
data alignment handling mode, current priority, and base priority are
taken from the parent process object.

A kernel context frame is built on the specified kernel stack which will
cause the thread to begin execution in the kernel thread startup
routine. The kernel thread startup routine will call the specified start
routine which is responsible for initializing the executive state of the
thread as necessary. If the thread is a system thread, then the
executive startup routine will call the thread's entry point directly.
If, however, the thread is a user thread, then the executive startup
routine returns control to the kernel thread startup routine which
restores the user mode state and continues execution of the thread in
user mode.

A thread begins execution in kernel mode at IRQL APC_LEVEL with the
queuing of APCs enabled. It is the responsibility of the executive to
lower IRQL to 0 as soon as thread initialization is complete.

Once a thread object has been initialized, it can be readied for
execution with the KeReadyThread function.

2.1.4.2 Alert Thread

A thread object can be alerted with the KeAlertThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeAlertThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE AlertMode

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

AlertMode - The processor mode (UserMode or KernelMode) for which the
thread is to be alerted.

Alerting a thread object causes the alert variable associated with the
specified processor mode to be set to a value of TRUE.

If the thread object is currently in a Wait state, the Wait is
alertable, and the specified processor mode is less than or equal to the
Wait mode, then the thread is Unwaited with a completion status of
STATUS_ALERTED and the specified alert variable is set to a value of
FALSE.

Alerts provide a way in which to break into a thread's execution at
well-defined points. These points occur when the thread Waits in an
alertable state and when the thread polls the alerted flag using the
KeTestAlertThread function.

The previous value of the alert variable for the specified processor
mode is returned as the function value. If the return value is TRUE,
then the subject thread was already alerted for the specified processor
mode. If the return value is FALSE, then the subject thread was not
previously alerted.

2.1.4.3 Alert and Resume Thread

A thread object can be kernel mode alerted and its execution resumed
with the KeAlertResumeThread function:

ULONG

KeAlertResumeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

This function executes the equivalent of a KeAlertThread function for
kernel mode followed by a KeResumeThread function on the specified
thread object.

Resuming a thread object checks the suspend count of the subject thread.
If the suspend count is zero, then the thread is not currently suspended
and no operation is performed. Otherwise, the subject thread's suspend
count is decremented. If the resultant value is zero, then the execution
of the subject thread is resumed by releasing its builtin suspend
semaphore.

The previous suspend count is returned as the function value. If the
return value is zero, then the subject thread was not previously
suspended. If the return value is one, then the subject thread's
execution was resumed. If the returned value is not zero or one, then
the subject thread is still suspended and must be resumed the number of
times specified by the return value minus one before it will actually
resume execution.

2.1.4.4 Confine Thread

The execution of the current thread can be confined to the current
processor with the KeConfineThread function:

KAFFINITY

KeConfineThread (

);

Confining the execution of the current thread to the current processor
causes the thread's affinity to be set such that it can only execute on
the current processor. The previous affinity is returned as the function
value and can be used to later restore the thread's affinity with the
KeSetAffinityThread function.

This function is useful when it is desirable to avoid translation buffer
flushes across the entire multiprocessor complex while certain page
manipulations are taking place. For example, the zero page writer
selects a page to zero, confines its execution to the current processor,
flushes the current processor's translation buffer, maps the page into
the system part of the virtual address space reserved for zeroing pages,
and then proceeds to zero the page. If the execution of the zero page
writer was not confined during the page zeroing operation, then the
translation buffers of all processors in the multiprocessor complex
would have to be flushed before mapping and zeroing the page could
commence.

2.1.4.5 Delay Execution 

The execution of the current thread can be delayed for a specified
interval of time with the KeDelayExecutionThread function:

NTSTATUS

KeDelayExecutionThread (

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE WaitMode,

IN BOOLEAN Alertable,

IN PTIME Interval

);

Parameters:

WaitMode - The processor mode on whose behalf the Wait is occurring.

Alertable - A boolean value that specifies whether the Wait is
alertable.

Interval - The absolute or relative time over which the Wait is to
occur.

The expiration time is computed and the current thread is put in a
Waiting state. When the specified interval of time has passed, the
thread will exit the Waiting state and continue execution.

The reason for the Wait is set to DelayExecution.

The WaitMode parameter specifies on whose behalf the Wait is occurring
(i.e., kernel or user).

The Alertable parameter specifies whether the thread can be alerted
while it is in the Waiting state. If the value of this parameter is TRUE
and the thread is alerted for a mode that is equal to or more privileged
than the Wait mode, then the thread's Wait will be satisfied with a
completion status of STATUS_ALERTED.

If the WaitMode parameter is UserMode and the Alertable parameter TRUE,
then the thread can also be awakened to deliver a user mode APC. Kernel
mode APCs always cause the subject thread to be awakened if the Wait
IRQL is zero and no kernel APC is in progress.

The expiration time of the delay is expressed as either an absolute time
at which the delay is to expire, or time that is relative to the current
system time. If the value of the Interval parameter is negative, then
the expiration time is relative. Otherwise, the expiration time is
absolute.

The value returned by KeDelayExecutionThread function determines how the
delay was completed.

A value of STATUS_SUCCESS is returned if the delay was completed because
the specified interval of time elapsed.

A value of STATUS_ALERTED is returned if the delay was completed because
the thread was alerted.

A value of STATUS_USER_APC is returned if a user mode APC is to be
delivered.

2.1.4.6 Disable Queuing of APCs

The queuing of APCs to a thread object can be disabled with the
KeDisableApcQueuingThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeDisableApcQueuingThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Disabling the queuing of APCs to a thread object causes any attempt to
direct an APC to the thread to be ignored.

During the termination of a thread, the executive must run down and
clean up all thread data structures. When the APC queue itself is
processed, the executive first disables APCs and then flushes the APC
queue.

The previous value of the APC queuable state is returned as the function
value. If the return value is TRUE, then APC queuing was previously
enabled. Otherwise, a value of FALSE is returned and APC queuing was
disabled.

2.1.4.7 Enable Queuing of APCs

The queuing of APCs to a thread object can be enabled with the
KeEnableApcQueuingThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeEnableApcQueuingThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Enabling the queuing of APCs to a thread object allows APC objects to be
inserted in the subject thread's APC queue for subsequent delivery when
conditions permit.

The previous value of the APC queuable state is returned as the function
value. If the return value is TRUE, then APC queuing was previously
enabled. Otherwise, a value of FALSE is returned and APC queuing was
disabled.

2.1.4.8 Force Resumption of Thread

A thread object's execution can be forced to resume with the
KeForceResumeThread function:

ULONG

KeForceResumeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Forcing the resumption of a thread object's execution checks the suspend
and freeze count of the subject thread. If both counts are zero, then
the thread is not currently suspended and no operation is performed.
Otherwise, the subject thread's suspend and freeze counts are both set
to zero, and the execution of the subject thread is resumed by releasing
its builtin suspend semaphore.

The sum of the previous suspend and freeze counts is returned as the
function value. If the return value is zero, then the subject thread was
not previously suspended. Otherwise, the subject thread was suspended
and its execution was resumed.

This function is intended for use by the executive when it wants to
terminate the execution of a thread that may be in a suspended state.

2.1.4.9 Freeze Thread

The execution of a thread object can be frozen with the KeFreezeThread
function:

ULONG

KeFreezeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Freezing a thread object causes the thread's freeze count to be
incremented. If incrementing the freeze count would cause it to
overflow, then the count is not incremented and the exception
STATUS_SUSPEND_COUNT_EXCEEDED is raised. Otherwise, the freeze count is
incremented. If the resultant value is one and the suspend count is
zero, then the thread's builtin suspend APC object is queued.

When the suspend APC is delivered to the subject thread, a nonalertable
Wait on the thread's builtin semaphore object is executed which freezes
thread execution. The subject thread can be subsequently unfrozen with
the KeUnfreezeThread function.

The previous freeze count is returned as the function value. If the
return value is zero, then the subject thread was not previously frozen.
Otherwise, the thread was previously frozen and must be unfrozen the
number of times specified by the return value plus one before it will
actually resume execution.

The freeze and unfreeze functions are similar to the suspend and resume
functions, but are intended for use by system software as opposed to
being exported to users. The freeze and unfreeze functions are used to
suspend and resume thread execution during debugging operations.

2.1.4.10 Query Data Alignment Mode

The data alignment handling mode for the current thread can be queried
with the KeQueryAutoAlignmentThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeQueryAutoAlignmentThread (

)

The data alignment handling mode for the current thread is returned as
the function value. A value of TRUE is returned if user mode data
alignment exceptions are automatically handled by the kernel and are not
raised as exceptions. Otherwise, user mode data alignment exceptions are
not handled by the kernel and may, or may not, be raised as exceptions
depending on host hardware capabilities. Automatic handling of user mode
data alignment exceptions means that the kernel emulates misaligned data
references and completes the offending instructions as if no
misalignment exception had occurred. Misaligned references in kernel
mode are never automatically handled and are always raised as
exceptions.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

Certain processors (e.g., the i386) always handle misaligned data in
hardware. On these processors, enabling or disabling the automatic
handling of data alignment exceptions has no effect. On other processors
(e.g., i486, MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP) the handling of
misaligned data is handled according to the mode established for the
respective thread.

2.1.4.11 Query Base Priority

The base priority of a thread object can be queried with the
KeQueryBasePriorityThread function:

LONG

KeQueryBasePriorityThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

The base priority increment of the specified thread is returned as the
function value. The base priority increment is defined as the difference
between the specified thread's base priority and the base priority of
the thread's process.

2.1.4.12 Read State Thread

The current state of a thread object can be read with the
KeReadStateThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeReadStateThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

The current state of the thread object is returned as the function
value. If the current state of the thread is Signaled, then a value of
TRUE is returned. Otherwise, a value of FALSE is returned.

2.1.4.13 Ready Thread

A thread object can be readied for execution with the KeReadyThread
function:

VOID

KeReadyThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Readying a thread object causes the thread to be considered for
immediate execution on a processor.

If the thread's process is not in the balance set, then the thread's
dispatching state is set to Ready and the thread object is inserted in
the process' ready queue. Otherwise, an attempt is made to dispatch the
thread on one of the processors in the multiprocessor complex. If the
priority of the subject thread is greater than the priority of one or
more threads running on processors that the subject thread can also run
on, then the thread with the lowest priority is selected for preemption,
the subject thread's dispatching state is set to Standby and an
interprocessor interrupt is sent to the target processor to cause it to
redispatch. Otherwise, the subject thread's dispatching state is set to
Ready and the thread is inserted at the tail of the dispatcher ready
queue selected by its priority.

2.1.4.14 Resume Thread

The execution of a thread object can be resumed with the KeResumeThread
function:

ULONG

KeResumeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Resuming a thread object checks the suspend count of the subject thread.
If the suspend count is zero, then the thread is not currently suspended
and no operation is performed. Otherwise, the subject thread's suspend
count is decremented. If the resultant value is zero and the freeze
count is also zero, then the execution of the subject thread is resumed
by releasing its builtin suspend semaphore.

The previous suspend count is returned as the function value. If the
return value is zero, then the subject thread was not previously
suspended. If the return value is one, then the subject thread's
execution was resumed. If the returned value is not zero or one, then
the subject thread is still suspended and must be resumed the number of
times specified by the return value minus one before it will actually
resume execution.

The suspend and resume functions are similar to the freeze and unfreeze
functions, but are usable from both system and user software. The freeze
and unfreeze functions are used to suspend and resume thread execution
during debugging operations.

2.1.4.15 Rundown Thread

The current thread object can be run down with the KeRundownThread
function:

VOID

KeRundownThread (

);

This function runs down thread structures that are guarded by the
dispatcher database lock and which must be processed before actually
terminating the thread. An example of such a data structure is the
mutant ownership list that is anchored in the thread object.

2.1.4.16 Set Affinity Thread

The affinity of a thread object can be set with the KeSetAffinity
function:

KAFFINITY

KeSetAffinityThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN KAFFINITY Affinity

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Affinity - The new set of processors on which the thread can run.

Setting the affinity of a thread object establishes a new set of
processors on which the thread can execute. The new affinity must be a
subset of the parent process's affinity. If the new affinity is zero, or
is not a subset of the parent process's affinity, then an error
condition is raised. Otherwise, the new affinity of the thread is set,
and the previous affinity is returned as the function value.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Running or Standby and
the new affinity is such that the thread cannot execute on the target
processor, then a new thread is selected for execution and an
interprocessor interrupt is sent to the target processor.

2.1.4.17 Set Data Alignment Mode

The data alignment handling mode for the current thread can be set with
the KeSetAutoAlignmentThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeSetAutoAlignmentThread (

IN BOOLEAN Enable

)

Parameters:

Enable - A boolean variable that specifies the handling mode for data
alignment exceptions in the current thread.

The Enable parameter specifies the handling mode for data alignment
exceptions in the current thread. If this parameter is TRUE, then user
mode data alignment exceptions are automatically handled by the kernel
and are not raised as exceptions. Otherwise, user mode data alignment
exceptions are not handled by the kernel and may, or may not, be raised
as exceptions depending on host hardware capabilities. Automatic
handling of user mode data alignment exceptions means that the kernel
emulates misaligned data references and completes the offending
instructions as if no misalignment exception had occurred. Misaligned
references in kernel mode are never automatically handled and are always
raised as exceptions.

The previous data alignment handling mode is returned as the function
value.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

Certain processors (e.g., the i386) always handle misaligned data in
hardware. On these processors, enabling or disabling the automatic
handling of data alignment exceptions has no effect. On other processors
(e.g., i486, MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP) the handling of
misaligned data is handled according to the mode established for the
respective thread.

2.1.4.18 Set Base Priority

The base priority of a thread object can be set with the
KeSetBasePriorityThread function:

LONG

KeSetBasePriorityThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN LONG Increment

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Increment - The base priority increment that is to be applied to the
specified thread.

The new base priority is computed by adding the specified priority
increment to the base priority of the specified thread's process. The
resultant value is stored as the base priority of the specified thread.

The new base priority is restricted to the priority class of the
specified thread's process. This means that the base priority is not
allowed to cross over from a realtime priority class to a variable
priority class or vice versa.

The previous base priority increment of the specified thread is returned
as the function value. The previous base priority increment is defined
as the difference between the specified thread's old base priority and
the base priority of the thread's process.

2.1.4.19 Set Priority Thread

The priority of a thread object can be set with the KeSetPriority
function:

KPRIORITY

KeSetPriorityThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN KPRIORITY Priority

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Priority - The new priority of the thread.

Setting the priority of a thread object causes its eligibility for
execution to be reexamined. The exact action that is taken depends on
the current dispatching state of the thread. If the new priority is
greater than the maximum thread priority, then an error condition is
raised.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Ready and the thread is
currently inserted in the parent process's ready queue, then the
priority of the thread is changed and no further action is taken.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Ready and the thread is
currently inserted in one of the dispatcher ready queues, then the
thread is removed from its current ready queue, its priority is set to
the specified value, and the thread is readied for execution as if it
had just entered the ready state.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Waiting or Terminated,
then the priority of the thread is changed and no further action is
taken.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Standby or Running and
the priority of the thread is being raised, then the priority of the
thread is changed and no further action is taken.

If the dispatching state of the thread object is Standby or Running and
the priority of the thread is being lowered, then a check is performed
to determine if the thread should be preempted to run a higher priority
thread. If a higher priority thread can execute on the target processor,
then it is selected for execution and an interprocessor interrupt is
sent to the target processor. Otherwise, no action is taken.

The previous priority of the subject thread is returned as the function
value.

2.1.4.20 Suspend Thread

The execution of a thread object can be suspended with the
KeSuspendThread function:

ULONG

KeSuspendThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Suspending a thread object causes the thread's suspend count to be
incremented. If incrementing the suspend count would cause it to
overflow, then the count is not incremented and the exception
STATUS_SUSPEND_COUNT_EXCEEDED is raised. Otherwise, the suspend count is
incremented, and if the resultant value is one and the freeze count is
zero, then the thread's builtin suspend APC object is queued.

When the suspend APC is delivered to the subject thread, a nonalertable
Wait on the thread's builtin semaphore object is executed which suspends
thread execution. The subject thread can be subsequently resumed with
either the KeResumeThread or KeAlertResumeThread function.

The previous suspend count is returned as the function value. If the
return value is zero, then the subject thread was not previously
suspended. Otherwise, the thread was previously suspended and must be
resumed the number of times specified by the return value plus one
before it will actually resume execution.

The suspend and resume functions are similar to the freeze and unfreeze
functions, but are usable from both system and user software. The freeze
and unfreeze functions are used to suspend and resume thread execution
during debugging operations.

2.1.4.21 Terminate Thread

The execution of the current thread can be terminated with the
KeTerminateThread function:

VOID

KeTerminateThread (

IN KPRIORITY Increment

);

Parameters:

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied is terminating
the current thread causes a Wait to be satisfied.

Terminating the current thread causes the dispatching state of the
thread to be set to Terminated and the state of the thread object to be
set to Signaled.

An attempt is made to satisfy as many Waits as possible for the current
thread object.

A new thread object is selected for execution on the current processor
and a context switch to the new thread is performed. There is no return
from this function.

2.1.4.22 Test Alert Thread

An alert condition for the current thread can be tested for with the
KeTestAlertThread function:

BOOLEAN

KeTestAlertThread (

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE AlertMode

);

Parameters:

AlertMode - The processor mode (UserMode or KernelMode) which is to be
tested for an alert condition.

This function tests to determine if the current thread's alert variable
for the specified processor mode has a value of TRUE or whether a user
mode APC should be delivered to the current thread.

If the alert variable associated with the specified processor mode is
TRUE, then it is set to a value of FALSE.

If the alert variable associated with the specified processor mode is
FALSE and the specified processor mode is user, then the subject
thread's APC queue is examined to determine whether a user mode APC
should be delivered. If the user mode APC queue contains one or more
entries, then the user APC pending variable is set to a value of TRUE in
the current thread object.

The previous value of the alert variable for the specified processor
mode is returned as the function value. If the return value is TRUE,
then the current thread was alerted. Otherwise, a value of FALSE is
returned and the current thread was not alerted.

2.1.4.23 Unfreeze Thread

The execution of a thread object can be unfrozen with the
KeUnfreezeThread function:

ULONG

KeUnfreezeThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Unfreezing a thread object checks the freeze count of the subject
thread. If the freeze count is zero, then the thread is not currently
frozen and no operation is performed. Otherwise, the subject thread's
freeze count is decremented. If the resultant value is zero and the
suspend count is also zero, then the execution of the subject thread is
unfrozen by releasing its builtin suspend semaphore.

The previous freeze count is returned as the function value. If the
return value is zero, then the subject thread was not previously frozen.
If the return value is one, then the subject thread's execution was
unfrozen. If the returned value is not zero or one, then the subject
thread is still frozen and must be unfrozen the number of times
specified by the return value minus one before it will actually resume
execution.

The freeze and unfreeze functions are similar to the suspend and resume
functions, but are intended for use by system software as opposed to
being exported to users. The freeze and unfreeze functions are used to
suspend and resume thread execution during debugging operations.

2.1.4.24 Thread Performance Data

Several counters are maintained for each thread object to determine the
various execution characteristics of the thread.

Two of the counters maintain the number of clock ticks that occurred
while the thread was in user mode and while the thread was in kernel
mode. These counters provide a quantitative measure of the distribution
of computation time between the system and the user.

2.1.5 Timer Object

A timer object is used to record the passage of time. A timer object is
set to a specified time and then expires when the time becomes due. When
a timer object is set, its state is set to Not-Signaled and it is
inserted in the system timer queue according to its expiration time.
When the timer object expires, it is removed from the system timer queue
and its state is set to Signaled.

A Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) can optionally be executed when a timer
expires. This procedure executes at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL in the context
of whatever thread happens to be executing when the timer expires.

Waiting on a timer object causes the execution of the subject thread to
be suspended until the timer object attains a Signaled state. Satisfying
the Wait for a timer object does not cause the state of the timer object
to change. Therefore, when a timer object attains a Signaled state, an
attempt is made to Satisfy as many Waits as possible.

Timer objects can be used to synchronize the execution of specific
actions with time. This execution can occur at fixed points in time or
at various intervals.

Programming interfaces that support the thread object include:

KeInitializeTimer - Initialize a timer object

KeCancelTimer - Cancel timer object expiration

KeReadStateTimer - Read state of timer object

KeSetTimer - Set timer object expiration time

2.1.5.1 Initialize Timer

A timer object can be initialized with the KeInitializeTime function:

VOID

KeInitializeTimer (

IN PKTIMER Timer

);

Parameters:

Timer - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type timer.

The timer object data structure is initialized with a state of
Not-Signaled.

2.1.5.2 Cancel Timer

A timer object can be canceled with the KeCancelTimer function:

BOOLEAN

KeCancelTimer (

IN PKTIMER Timer

);

Parameters:

Timer - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type timer.

If the timer object is currently in the system timer queue, then it is
removed from the queue and a value of TRUE is returned as the function
value (a boolean state variable records whether the timer object is in
the system timer queue). Otherwise, no operation is performed and a
value of FALSE is returned as the function value.

2.1.5.3 Read State Timer

The current state of a timer object can be read with the
KeReadStateTimer function:

BOOLEAN

KeReadStateTimer (

IN PKTIMER Timer

);

Parameters:

Timer - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type timer.

The current state of the timer object is returned as the function value.
If the current state of the timer object is Signaled, then a value of
TRUE is returned. Otherwise, a value of FALSE is returned.

2.1.5.4 Set Timer

A timer object can be set to expire at a specified time with the
KeSetTimer function:

BOOLEAN

KeSetTimer (

IN PKTIMER Timer,

IN TIME DueTime,

IN PKDPC Dpc OPTIONAL

);

Parameters:

Timer - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type timer.

DueTime - The absolute or relative time at which the timer is to expire.

Dpc - An optional pointer to a control object of type deferred procedure
call.

Setting a timer object causes the absolute expiration time to be
computed, the state of the timer to be set to Not-Signaled, and the
timer object to be inserted in the system timer queue. If the timer
object is already in the timer queue, then it is implicitly canceled
before it is set to the new expiration time (a boolean state variable
records whether the timer object is in the system timer queue).

The expiration time of the timer object is expressed as either the
absolute time that the timer is to expire, or a time that is relative to
the current system time. If the value of the DueTime parameter is
negative, then the expiration time is relative. Otherwise, the
expiration time is absolute.

The expiration time is expressed in system time units which are 100ns
intervals.

If the Dpc parameter is specified, then a DPC object is associated with
the timer object.

If the timer object was previously in the system timer queue, then a
value of TRUE is returned as the function value. Otherwise, a value of
FALSE is returned.

When the timer object expires, it is removed from the system timer queue
and its state is set to Signaled. If a DPC object was associated with
the timer object when it was set, then it is inserted in the system DPC
queue and will execute as soon as conditions permit (a boolean state
variable records whether the DPC object is in the system DPC queue).

2.2 Control Objects

This section describes the various types of control objects and the
interfaces that are provided to manipulate these objects.

2.2.1 Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC) Object

An Asynchronous Procedure Call (APC) object provides the capability to
break into the execution of a specified thread and cause a procedure to
be called in a specified processor mode. Software running in kernel mode
can only be interrupted to execute asynchronous procedures in kernel
mode, whereas software running in user mode can be interrupted to
execute asynchronous procedures in both user and kernel mode.

An asynchronous procedure call occurs in the context of a specified
thread and is triggered by a software interrupt at APC_LEVEL.

There are two types of APC objects:

1. Special

2. Normal

Special APC objects cause the execution of a thread to be interrupted to
execute a procedure in kernel mode at IRQL APC_LEVEL. Special APC
objects can break into the execution of a thread at any time the thread
is executing at IRQL 0.

Ordinarily, special APC procedures perform a minimal amount of work and
return immediately to the APC dispatcher without calling any external
procedures. However, if code running as part of a special APC procedure
acquires a mutex that is also acquired by code outside the special APC
procedure, then the code outside the special APC procedure must
explicitly raise IRQL to APC_LEVEL when it wants to acquire the mutex.

This convention is required to prevent the special APC procedure from
acquiring the mutex at an inappropriate time, which can happen if the
thread that receives the special APC already owns the mutex when the
special APC procedure is executed.

During the execution of a special APC procedure, page faults can be
taken and all the kernel services are available. However, system
services are not available, and care must be taken to ensure that any
executive services that are used can be safely called.

Normal APC objects cause the execution of a thread to be interrupted to
execute a procedure in kernel mode at IRQL APC_LEVEL and, in addition, a
procedure in either kernel or user mode at IRQL 0. The first procedure
(executed in kernel mode) is called just prior to calling the second
procedure in the specified mode, and must adhere to the conventions for
special APC procedures.

Normal APC objects can only break into the execution of a thread when
the thread is executing at IRQL 0 and a normal APC for the specified
mode is not already active.

While a normal APC is active for kernel mode, further normal APCs are
software disabled until the active APC completes. The delivery of normal
APCs for kernel mode is also implicitly disabled while a thread owns one
or more mutexes (i.e, the thread does not have to explicitly raise IRQL
to APC_LEVEL in order to synchronize with normal APC procedures).

Normal user mode APCs are only delivered when the subject thread is
alertable. This occurs when a thread waits user-mode alertable and when
the thread calls KeTestAlertThread.

While a normal APC is active for user mode, further normal APCs for user
mode are software disabled by the alert mechanism. Upon completion of a
normal APC in user mode, KeTestAlertThread is automatically called,
which enables the delivery of another user mode APC. Thus, once a thread
is user-mode alertable and an APC is delivered, further APCs are
delivered one after the other until there are no APCs remaining in the
user-mode APC queue.

During the execution of a normal APC procedure, all system operations
are available and page faults can be taken.

Programming interfaces that support the APC object include:

KeInitializeApc - Initialize an APC object

KeFlushQueueApc - Flush all APC objects from APC queue

KeInsertQueueApc - Insert APC object into APC queue

KeRemoveQueueApc - Remove APC object from APC queue

2.2.1.1 Initialize APC

An APC object can be initialized with the KeInitializeApc function:

VOID

KeInitializeApc (

IN PKAPC Apc,

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN KAPC_ENVIRONMENT Environment,

IN PKKERNEL_ROUTINE KernelRoutine,

IN PKRUNDOWN_ROUTINE RundownRoutine OPTIONAL,

IN PKNORMAL_ROUTINE NormalRoutine OPTIONAL,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE ApcMode OPTIONAL,

IN PVOID NormalContext OPTIONAL

);

Parameters:

Apc - A pointer to a control object of type APC.

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

Environment - The environment in which the APC will execute
(OriginalApcEnvironment, AttachedApcEnvironment, or
CurrentApcEnvironment).

KernelRoutine - A pointer to a function that is to be executed at IRQL
APC_LEVEL in kernel mode.

RundownRoutine - An optional pointer to a function that is to be
executed if the APC object is contained in a thread's APC queue when the
thread terminates.

NormalRoutine - An optional pointer to a function that is to be executed
at IRQL 0 in the specified processor mode. If this parameter is not
specified, then the ApcMode and NormalContext parameters are ignored.

ApcMode - The processor mode (UserMode or KernelMode) in which the
function specified by the NormalRoutine parameter is to be executed.
This parameter is ignored if the NormalRoutine parameter is not
specified.

NormalContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure which is to be
passed to the function specified by the NormalRoutine parameter. This
parameter is ignored if the NormalRoutine parameter is not specified.

The function specified by the KernelRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKKERNEL_ROUTINE) (

IN PKAPC Apc,

IN OUT PKNORMAL_ROUTINE *NormalRoutine,

IN OUT PVOID *NormalContext,

IN OUT PVOID *SystemArgument1,

IN OUT PVOID *SystemArgument2

);

Parameters:

Apc - A pointer to a control object of type APC.

NormalRoutine - A pointer to a pointer to the normal routine function
that was specified when the APC was initialized.

NormalContext - A pointer to a pointer to an arbitrary data structure
that was specified when the APC was initialized.

SystemArgument1, SystemArgument2 - A set of two pointers to two
arguments that contain untyped data.

The function specified by the RundownRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKRUNDOWN_ROUTINE) (

IN PKAPC Apc

);

Parameters:

Apc - A pointer to a control object of type APC.

The function specified by the NormalRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKNORMAL_ROUTINE) (

IN PVOID NormalContext,

IN PVOID SystemArgument1,

IN PVOID SystemArgument2

);

Parameters:

NormalContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the corresponding APC object was initialized.

SystemArgument1, SystemArgument2 - A set of two arguments that contain
untyped data.

The type of APC object to be initialized is determined by the presence
or absence of the optional NormalRoutine parameter. If the NormalRoutine
parameter is present, then a normal APC object is initialized and the
values of the ApcMode and NormalContext parameters are stored in the APC
object. Otherwise, a special APC object is initialized for execution in
kernel mode.

The Environment parameter specifies the execution environment of the
specified APC object. An APC object can be executed in the context of a
thread's parent process or a process to which the thread has attached.

The KernelRoutine parameter specifies the procedure that is to be called
in kernel mode at IRQL APC_LEVEL. This procedure is called with a copy
of the parameters that are specified for the normal routine when the APC
is initialized and can modify these parameters as necessary to alter the
execution of the normal routine. If the normal routine is not specified
when the APC is initialized, then any assignment to these parameters is
ignored.

If specified, the RundownRoutine parameter specifies a procedure that is
to be called when a thread terminates with the APC object in its APC
queue. The purpose of this routine is to allow for special disposition
of the APC object during thread rundown.

If specified, the NormalRoutine parameter specifies the procedure that
is to be executed in the processor mode specified by the ApcMode
parameter. This procedure will be called with the NormalContext
parameter and two additional arguments provided by the system when the
APC queued.

In order to actually interrupt the execution of a thread, an APC object
must be inserted into one of the thread's APC queues (there is a
separate APC queue for user and kernel mode).

2.2.1.2 Flush Queue APC

All the APC objects in a specified thread's APC queue can be flushed
with the KeFlushQueueApc function:

PLIST_ENTRY

KeFlushQueueApc (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE ApcMode

);

Parameters:

Thread - A pointer to a dispatcher object of type thread.

ApcMode - The processor mode (UserMode or KernelMode) of the APC queue
that is to be flushed.

An APC queue is flushed by removing the APC listhead from the list of
APC entries, reinitializing the APC listhead, and returning the list of
APC objects as the function value. If the APC queue is empty, then a
NULL pointer is returned. Otherwise, the address of the list entry for
the first APC object is returned as the function value. It is the
responsibility of the caller to scan the list of APC objects and
dispense with each object as appropriate.

The APC objects are linked together by a list entry in each object.
Scanning this list can be accomplished using the CONTAINING_RECORD
function to locate the address of the respective APC object given the
address of its list entry.

This function is used by the executive during thread termination to
remove remaining entries from the thread's APC lists.

2.2.1.3 Insert Queue APC

An APC object can be inserted into a thread's APC queue with the
KeInsertQueueApc function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertQueueApc (

IN PKAPC Apc,

IN PVOID SystemArgument1,

IN PVOID SystemArgument2,

IN KPRIORITY Increment

);

Parameters:

Apc - A pointer to a control object of type APC.

SystemArgument1, SystemArgument2 - A set of two arguments that contain
untyped data.

Increment - The priority increment that is to be applied if queuing the
APC causes the target thread's wait to be satisfied.

If the specified APC object is already in an APC queue (a boolean state
variable records whether the APC object is in an APC queue) or APC
queuing is disabled for the subject thread, then no operation is
performed and a function value of FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the APC
object is inserted into the APC queue specified by the ApcMode and
Thread parameters that were supplied when the APC object was initialized
and a function value of TRUE is returned.

When proper enabling conditions are present, the APC will be delivered
to the subject thread and the specified procedure(s) will be executed in
the specified processor mode.

A special APC is deliverable whenever the IRQL of the subject thread is
zero.

A normal kernel APC is deliverable whenever the IRQL of the subject
thread is zero, a normal kernel APC is not already in progress, and the
subject thread does not own any mutexes.

A normal user APC is deliverable when the subject thread waits user-mode
alertable and when the subject thread calls KeTestAlertThread.

2.2.1.4 Remove Queue APC

An APC object can be removed from an APC queue with the KeRemoveQueueApc
function:

BOOLEAN

KeRemoveQueueApc (

IN PKAPC Apc

);

Parameters:

Apc - A pointer to a control object of type APC.

If the specified APC object is not currently in an APC queue (a boolean
state variable records whether the APC object is in an APC queue), then
a value of FALSE is returned and no operation is performed. Otherwise,
the specified APC object is removed from its APC queue and a function
value of TRUE is returned.

2.2.2 Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) Object

A Deferred Procedure Call (DPC) object provides the capability to break
into the execution of the current thread and cause a procedure to be
executed in kernel mode at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL.

There is one DPC queue for the entire system. When a DPC object is
inserted in the DPC queue, a software interrupt is requested at
DISPATCH_LEVEL on the current processor. As soon as the IRQL falls below
DISPATCH_LEVEL, a software interrupt will be taken which will cause the
DPC dispatcher to execute.

The DPC dispatcher removes entries from the DPC queue, calls the
specified procedure, and upon return, removes another entry from the
queue. This is continued until there are no longer any entries in the
DPC queue, at which time the DPC dispatcher checks to determine if
another thread has been selected for execution on the current processor.
If a thread has been selected, then a context switch to that thread is
performed. Otherwise, the interrupt is dismissed and execution of the
current thread is continued.

A deferred procedure call occurs at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL in the context
of whatever thread was interrupted when the DISPATCH_LEVEL interrupt
occurred. A very limited set of operations can be performed by the DPC
procedure.

No system services can be executed by the DPC procedure nor can any page
faults be taken. The kernel services are generally available. However,
the Wait functions can only be called if it is known that they will not
actually cause a wait to occur. (Using an explicit time-out value of
zero implements a conditional Wait operation). If page faults or waits
were allowed, then it would be possible to randomly cause an arbitrary
thread to wait in the kernel at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL causing possible
deadlocks and data corruption.

Deferred procedure execution is intended mainly for use by device
drivers that need to lower their IRQL to complete an I/O operation. The
kernel itself, however, uses DPC objects to implement timers, quantum
end, and power failure recovery.

Programming interfaces that support the DPC object include:

KeInitializeDpc - Initialize a DPC object

KeInsertQueueDpc - Insert DPC object into the DPC queue

KeRemoveQueueDpc - Remove DPC object from the DPC queue

2.2.2.1 Initialize DPC

A DPC object can be initialized with the KeInitializeDpc function:

VOID

KeInitializeDpc (

IN PKDPC Dpc,

IN PKDEFERRED_ROUTINE DeferredRoutine,

IN PVOID DeferredContext

);

Parameters:

Dpc - A pointer to a control object of type DPC.

DeferredRoutine - A pointer to a function that is to be called when the
DPC object is removed from the DPC queue.

DeferredContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that is to be
passed to the function specified by the DeferredRoutine parameter.

The function specified by the DeferredRoutine parameter has the
following type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKDEFERRED_ROUTINE) (

IN PKDPC Dpc,

IN PVOID DeferredContext,

IN PVOID SystemArgument1,

IN PVOID SystemArgument2

);

Parameters:

Dpc - A pointer to a control object of type DPC.

DeferredContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the DPC was initialized.

SystemArgument1, SystemArgument2 - A set of two arguments that contain
untyped data.

2.2.2.2 Insert Queue DPC

A DPC object can be inserted in the system DPC queue with the
KeInsertQueueDpc function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertQueueDpc (

IN PKDPC Dpc,

IN PVOID SystemArgument1,

IN PVOID SystemArgument2

);

Parameters:

Dpc - A pointer to a control object of type DPC.

SystemArgument1, SystemArgument2 - A set of two arguments that contain
untyped data.

If the specified DPC object is already in the DPC queue (a boolean state
variable records whether the DPC object is in the DPC queue), then no
operation is performed and a function value of FALSE is returned.
Otherwise, the DPC object is inserted in the DPC queue, a software
interrupt is request at IRQL DISPATCH_LEVEL on the current processor,
and a function value of TRUE is returned.

The deferred procedure will be executed as soon as the IRQL of the
current processor drops below DISPATCH_LEVEL.

2.2.2.3 Remove Queue DPC

A DPC object can be removed from the DPC queue with the KeRemoveQueueDpc
function:

BOOLEAN

KeRemoveQueueDpc (

IN PKDPC Dpc

);

Parameters:

Dpc - A pointer to a control object of type DPC.

If the specified DPC object is not currently in the DPC queue (a boolean
state variable records whether the DPC object is in the DPC queue), then
a value of FALSE is returned and no operation is performed. Otherwise,
the specified DPC object is removed from the DPC queue and a function
value of TRUE is returned.

2.2.3 Device Queue Object

A device queue object is used to record the state of a device driver and
to provide a queue into which I/O requests can be placed for subsequent
processing.

A device queue object has a state which is either Busy or Not-Busy.

When the state of a device queue object is Not-Busy, the associated
device driver is idle and therefore not performing any work.

A device queue object transitions to the Busy state when an attempt is
made to insert a device queue entry into a device queue that is empty.
For this case, the device queue entry is not actually placed in the
device queue, but rather, the device queue object is marked Busy and a
boolean value of FALSE is returned to signify that the associated device
driver should process the device queue entry immediately.

Once a device queue object is Busy, further I/O requests are placed in
the device queue in either a FIFO or key-sorted order.

A device queue object transitions to a Not-Busy state when an attempt is
made to remove a device queue entry from a device queue object and the
corresponding device queue is empty.

A device queue entry has the following type definition:

typedef struct _KDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY {

LIST_ENTRY DeviceListEntry;

ULONG SortKey;

BOOLEAN Inserted;

} KDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY;

Programming interfaces that support the device queue object include:

KeInitializeDeviceQueue - Initialize a device queue

KeInsertDeviceQueue - Insert entry at tail of device queue

KeInsertByKeyDeviceQueue - Insert entry by key into device queue

KeRemoveDeviceQueue - Remove entry from head of device queue

KeRemoveEntryDeviceQueue - Remove entry from device queue

2.2.3.1 Initialize Device Queue

A device queue object can be initialized with the
KeInitializeDeviceQueue function:

VOID

KeInitializeDeviceQueue (

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE DeviceQueue,

IN PKSPIN_LOCK SpinLock

);

Parameters:

DeviceQueue - A pointer to a control object of type device queue.

SpinLock - A pointer to an executive spin lock.

The device queue object data structure is initialized and the state of
the device queue is set to Not-Busy.

2.2.3.2 Insert Device Queue

An entry can be inserted at the tail of a device queue with the
KeInsertDeviceQueue function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertDeviceQueue (

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE DeviceQueue,

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY DeviceQueueEntry

);

Parameters:

DeviceQueue - A pointer to a control object of type device queue.

DeviceQueueEntry - A pointer to the device queue entry that is to be
inserted at the tail of the device queue.

The specified device queue spin lock is acquired, and the state of the
device queue is checked.

If the state of the device queue is Not-Busy, then the state of the
device queue is set to Busy, the device queue spin lock is released, and
a value of FALSE is returned as the function value (i.e., the device
queue entry is not inserted in the device queue).

If the state of the device queue is Busy, then the specified device
queue entry is inserted at the tail of device queue, the device queue
spin lock is released, and a value of TRUE is returned as the function
value.

This function is intended for use by code that queues an I/O request to
a device driver. It must be called from an IRQL of DISPATCH_LEVEL.

2.2.3.3 Insert By Key Device Queue

An entry can be inserted into a device queue according to a key value
with the KeInsertByKeyDeviceQueue function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertByKeyDeviceQueue (

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE DeviceQueue,

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY DeviceQueueEntry,

IN ULONG SortKey

);

Parameters:

DeviceQueue - A pointer to a control object of type device queue.

DeviceQueueEntry - A pointer to the device queue entry that is to be
inserted into the device queue by key.

SortKey - The sort key value that is to be used to determine the
position at which the device queue entry is to be inserted in the
specified device queue.

The specified device queue spin lock is acquired, and the state of the
device queue is checked.

If the state of the device queue is Not-Busy, then the state of the
device queue is set to Busy, the device queue spin lock is released, and
a value of FALSE is returned as the function value (i.e., the device
queue entry is not inserted in the device queue).

If the state of the device queue is Busy, then the specified device
queue entry is inserted into the device queue according to its sort key
value, the device queue spin lock is released, and a value of TRUE is
returned as the function value.

Insertion in the device queue is such that the preceding entry in the
queue has a sort key that is less than or equal to the new entry's sort
key and the succeeding entry has a sort key that is greater than the new
entry's sort key.

This function is intended for use by code that queues an I/O request to
a device driver. It must be called from an IRQL of DISPATCH_LEVEL.

2.2.3.4 Remove Device Queue

An entry can be removed from the head of a device queue with the
KeRemoveDeviceQueue function:

PKDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY

KeRemoveDeviceQueue (

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE DeviceQueue

);

Parameters:

DeviceQueue - A pointer to a control object of type device queue.

This function can only be called from an IRQL of DISPATCH_LEVEL and is
intended for use by device driver code that completes one I/O request
and starts the next one.

The specified device queue spin lock is acquired and the state of the
device queue is checked.

If the state of the device queue is Not-Busy, then a bug check will
occur (i.e., KeRemoveDeviceQueue cannot be called when the device queue
is Not-Busy).

If the state of the device queue is Busy, then an attempt is made to
remove an entry from the head of the device queue. If the device queue
is empty, then the state of the device queue is set to Not-Busy and a
NULL pointer is returned as the function value. Otherwise, the next
entry is removed from the head of the device queue, the inserted status
of the entry is set to FALSE, and the address of the entry is returned
as the function value.

The specified device queue spin lock is released.

2.2.3.5 Remove Entry Device Queue

A specific entry can be removed from a device queue with the
KeRemoveEntryDeviceQueue function:

BOOLEAN

KeRemoveEntryDeviceQueue (

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE DeviceQueue,

IN PKDEVICE_QUEUE_ENTRY DeviceQueueEntry

);

Parameters:

DeviceQueue - A pointer to a control object of type device queue.

DeviceQueueEntry - A pointer to the device queue entry that is to be
removed from the specified device queue.

The IRQL is raised to DISPATCH_LEVEL and the specified device queue spin
lock is acquired.

If the specified device queue entry is currently in a device queue (a
boolean state variable records whether a device queue entry is in a
device queue), then the device queue entry is removed from the device
queue, the inserted status of the device queue entry is set to FALSE,
and a value of TRUE is returned as the function value. Otherwise, the
specified device queue entry is not in a device queue and a value of
FALSE is returned.

The specified device queue spin lock is released and IRQL is restored to
its previous value.

This function is intended for use in canceling I/O operations and is
callable from any IRQL that is less than or equal to DISPATCH_LEVEL.

2.2.4 Interrupt Object

An interrupt object provides the capability to connect an interrupt
source to an interrupt service routine via an entry in an Interrupt
Dispatch Table (IDT). Each processor has an IDT that is used to dispatch
interrupts which occur on that processor.

The IDT is a software-defined table that contains an entry for each of
the Interrupt Request Levels (IRQLs). When an interrupt occurs at one of
these levels, the interrupt dispatcher reads the IRQL of the
interrupting source from the interrupt controller. This value is then
used to locate the corresponding entry in the IDT that is used to
dispatch the execution of the associated service routine.

Several of the IDT entries are reserved for use by the kernel and cannot
be connected to interrupt objects. These entries include the following:

o PASSIVE_LEVEL - Passive release

o APC_LEVEL - Asynchronous Procedure Call

o DISPATCH_LEVEL - Dispatch and Deferred Procedure Call

o WAKE_LEVEL - Wake system debugger

o CLOCK2_LEVEL - Interval timer

o IPI_LEVEL - Interprocessor request

o POWER_LEVEL - Power failure

o HIGH_LEVEL - Machine check

The remaining levels can be used for device interrupts or bus adapters.

In addition to the 16 entries that are directly associated with the
hardware interrupt request levels, there are 48 more entries in the IDT
that are provided to allow secondary level dispatching of interrupts.
These entries can be used by a first-level service routine (i.e., one
connected to IRQLs 0 - 15) to dispatch secondary level interrupts such
as those that might be received from a bus adapter. For example, a bus
adapter might have several devices that can cause interrupts and a
mechanism for identifying which device is requesting service. When a bus
adapter interrupt is received, the service routine connected to the
appropriate first level IDT entry is executed. This service routine
reads the adapter register that identifies the interrupting device and
uses the information to locate the appropriate second-level IDT entry.
The second-level IDT entry must be connected to an interrupt object and
contains the address of the interrupt transfer routine which is called.

An interrupt transfer routine has the following type definition:

typedef

BOOLEAN

(*PKTRANSFER_ROUTINE) (

);

Interrupt sources are classified as either LevelSensitive or Latched.
Level sensitive interrupts request an interrupt whenever the
corresponding interrupt request signal is asserted. The service routine
associated with the interrupt source must remove the cause of the
interrupt before the interrupt request is dropped. Latched interrupts
are requested whenever the corresponding interrupt request signal
transitions from the deasserted to the asserted state.

An interrupt object can only be connected to a single IDT entry. If a
particular service routine must be connected to the same interrupt on
multiple processors, then multiple interrupt objects must be used.
Multiple interrupt objects can be connected to a single IDT entry. They
must, however, all have the same interrupt type (i.e., level sensitive
or latched).

Interrupt objects are intended for use by device drivers.

\ Kernel code that utilizes interrupts directly does not connect
interrupts using this object. These interrupts include the interval
timer, power failure, machine check, and the two software interrupt
levels. The code for these interrupts is written in assembler since it
is small and system dependent. \

Programming interfaces that support the interrupt object include:

KeInitializeInterrupt - Initialize an interrupt object

KeConnectInterrupt - Connect interrupt object to an IDT entry

KeDisconnectInterrupt - Disconnect interrupt object from an IDT entry

KeSynchronizeExecution - Synchronize execution with an interrupt

2.2.4.1 Initialize Interrupt

An interrupt object can be initialized with the KeInitializeInterrupt
function:

VOID

KeInitializeInterrupt (

IN PKINTERRUPT Interrupt,

IN PKSERVICE_ROUTINE ServiceRoutine,

IN PVOID ServiceContext,

IN PKSPIN_LOCK SpinLock,

IN CCHAR Vector,

IN KIRQL InterruptIrql,

IN KIRQL SynchronizeIrql,

IN KINTERRUPT_MODE InterruptMode,

IN BOOLEAN ShareVector,

IN CCHAR ProcessorNumber,

IN BOOLEAN FloatingSave

);

Parameters:

Interrupt - A pointer to a control object of type interrupt.

ServiceRoutine - A pointer to a function that is to be called when an
interrupt occurs on the specified processor through the specified IDT
entry.

ServiceContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure which will be
passed to the ServiceRoutine function as a parameter.

SpinLock - A pointer to an spin lock that is to be used to synchronize
the execution of the ServiceRoutine function with the corresponding
device driver.

Vector - The index of the entry in the specified IDT that is to be
associated with ServiceRoutine function.

InterruptIrql - The request priority of the interrupting source.

SynchronizeIrql - The request priority that the interrupt should be
synchronzied with.

InterruptMode - The mode of the interrupt (LevelSensitive or Latched).

ShareVector - A boolean that specifies whether the interrupt vector to
which the object is connected may be shared. If FALSE then the vector
may not be shared, if TRUE it may be.

ProcessorNumber - The number of the processor whose IDT is to used when
connecting the interrupt.

FloatingSave - A boolean variable that specifies whether the floating
point context needs to be saved when a interrupt is received from the
interrupt source.

The function specified by the ServiceRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

BOOLEAN

(*PKSERVICE_ROUTINE) (

IN PKINTERRUPT Interrupt,

IN PVOID ServiceContext

);

Parameters:

Interrupt - A pointer to a control object of type interrupt which is
connected to the associated interrupt source.

ServiceContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the corresponding interrupt object was initialized.

The interrupt object is initialized with the specified parameters. In
order for the function specified by the ServiceRoutine parameter to
actually get called when an interrupt is received from the interrupt
source, the interrupt object must be connected to the specified IDT
entry using the KeConnectInterrupt function.

The spin lock specified by the SpinLock parameter is used to synchronize
execution.

If SynchronizeIrql is not equal to InterruptIrql, then the system will
raise its priority level to SynchronizeIrql level before acquiring the
lock specified by SpinLock. This allows support for devices with
multiple interrupt sources, since all can be synchronized with a single
spin lock at a single priority level.

It is an error for SynchronizeIrql to be less than InterruptIrql, the
system will refuse to connect such an interrupt object.

An interrupt object can only be connected to a single IDT entry on a
single processor. The Vector parameter specifies the IDT entry and the
ProcessorNumber parameter specifies which IDT is to be used. If a
particular service routine must be connected to the same IDT entry on
multiple processors, then multiple interrupt objects must be used. More
than one interrupt object, however, can be connected to the same IDT
entry on the same processor, but all such interrupt objects must have
been initialized with ShareVector set to TRUE. When this happens,
appropriate data structures are automatically set up to call each
connected interrupt service routine one after the other.

The mode of the interrupt specifies whether the interrupt is a
LevelSensitive or Latched interrupt. Level sensitive interrupts are
continually requested as long as the interrupt signal stays asserted.
Therefore, the interrupt service routine must remove the reason for the
interrupt before returning control. Latched interrupts are requested
only on the transition of the interrupt signal from deasserted to
asserted. The function specified by the ServiceRoutine parameter must
return a boolean value that signifies whether the interrupt was handled
or not.

The ShareVector parameter declares whether the interrupt object may be
connected to its interrupt vector at the same time as other interrupt
objects. All interrupt objects sharing an interrupt vector must have
ShareVector set to TRUE. The system may disallow sharing of an interrupt
vector, even if all interrupt objects for which connections are
attempted have ShareVector set to TRUE. This could happen because the
underlying hardware does not support sharing.

The FloatingSave parameter specifies whether the ServiceRoutine function
uses the floating point registers. If this parameter is TRUE, then the
floating context is saved before calling the specified service routine.
Otherwise, it is not saved and a fair amount of overhead is saved.

\ This parameter is being provided with the hope that a compiler option
will be implemented that allows a module to be compiled such that it
will not use the floating point registers. This option does not
currently exist and this parameter should always be specified as TRUE. \

Initializing an interrupt causes code to be generated that will
synchronize execution with the appropriate interrupt object, call the
specified interrupt service routine, and dismiss the interrupt.

2.2.4.2 Connect Interrupt

An interrupt object can be connected to an IDT entry with the
KeConnectInterrupt function:

BOOLEAN

KeConnectInterrupt (

IN PKINTERRUPT Interrupt

);

Parameters:

Interrupt - A pointer to a control object of type interrupt.

If the specified interrupt object is already connected (a boolean state
variable records whether the interrupt object is connected), the
specified vector number is greater than the maximum vector, the
specified IRQL is greater than HIGH_LEVEL, the specified level cannot be
connected to (e.g., a reserved level, sharing conflicts), or the
specified processor number is greater than the number of processors in
the configuration, then no operation is performed and a function value
of FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the interrupt object is connected to
the IDT entry that was specified when the interrupt object was
initialized and a function value of TRUE is returned.

Once an interrupt object is connected to an IDT entry, the corresponding
service routine will be called each time an interrupt is received from
that interrupt source. If multiple interrupt objects are connected to a
single IDT entry, then the service routines are called in the order in
which they were connected.

2.2.4.3 Disconnect Interrupt

An interrupt object can be disconnected from an IDT entry with the
KeDisconnectInterrupt function:

BOOLEAN

KeDisconnectInterrupt (

IN PKINTERRUPT interrupt

);

Parameters:

Interrupt - A pointer to a control object of type interrupt.

If the specified interrupt object is not connected (a boolean state
variable records whether the interrupt object is connected), then no
operation is performed and a function value of FALSE is returned.
Otherwise, the interrupt object is disconnected from the IDT entry that
was specified when the interrupt object was initialized and a function
value of TRUE is returned.

Further interrupts received from the interrupting source will be logged,
but otherwise ignored.

2.2.4.4 Synchronize Execution

The execution of a device driver function can be synchronized with the
execution of the service routine associated with an interrupt object
with the KeSynchronizeExecution function:

BOOLEAN

KeSynchronizeExecution (

IN PKINTERRUPT Interrupt,

IN PKSYNCHRONIZE_ROUTINE SynchronizeRoutine,

IN PVOID SynchronizeContext

);

Parameters:

Interrupt - A pointer to a control object of type interrupt.

SynchronizeRoutine - A pointer to a device driver function whose
execution is to be synchronized with the execution of the service
routine associated with the specified interrupt object.

SynchronizeContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure which is
to be passed to the function specified by the SynchronizeRoutine
parameter.

The function specified by the SynchronizeRoutine parameter has the
following type definition:

typedef

BOOLEAN

(*PKSYNCHRONIZE_ROUTINE) (

IN PVOID SynchronizeContext

);

Parameters:

ServiceContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the call to KeSynchronizeExecution was executed.

This function is used by a device driver to synchronize execution with a
service routine which may be executing on another processor in a
multiprocessor configuration. Such synchronization is only necessary in
those cases where both the service routine and device driver access the
same resources in a way that requires mutually exclusive access.

When this function is executed, the IRQL is raised to the level
specified by the interrupt source's interrupt object (the higher of
InterruptIrql and SynchronizeIrql), access is synchronized with the
corresponding service routine by acquiring the associated spin lock, and
then the specified routine is called. The routine should access
resources as necessary and return a boolean value. Upon return, the IRQL
is restored and the boolean value is returned as the function value.

Routines executed with this function execute at an elevated IRQL and
must be very short in duration. It is intended that these routines be
used for such purposes as loading device registers and should be only a
few microseconds in length.

The boolean return value is intended to be attached to the occurrence of
a power failure. A device driver can use a power status object to record
the occurrence of a power failure. The synchronize routine should raise
IRQL to POWER_LEVEL and test the corresponding status variable before
loading any device registers. If the value is TRUE, then power has
failed and the device may not be in an appropriate state. If the value
is FALSE, then power has not failed and a sequence of device register
loads can be performed without a power failure since power failure
interrupts are disabled.

2.2.5 Power Notify Object

A power notify object provides the capability to automatically have a
specified function called when power is restored after a power failure.

This object is intended for use by device drivers and other code that
needs to be asynchronously notified via a function call when power is
restored after a failure. The function call can be used to reinitialize
device state, restart I/O operations, etc.

A power notify object, when inserted in the power notify queue, is a
repeatable operation. That is, the specified function will be called
each time the power is restored. The kernel guarantees that once called,
the specified function will not be recursively recalled until it has
completed its execution and returned to the kernel.

When power is restored after a power failure, the kernel scans the power
notify queue and calls the specified functions in the order in which
they were inserted. Thus layered device drivers can ensure that they are
called in the correct order.

If the power fails and is restored during the scan of the power notify
queue, then the scan is immediately restarted at the beginning of the
queue.

A power notify object cannot be inserted in, or removed from, the power
notify queue from a function that is called as the result of power
restoration (i.e., a power notify routine).

Programming interfaces that support the power notify object include:

KeInitializePowerNotify - Initialize notify object

KeInsertQueuePowerNotify - Insert power notify object

KeRemoveQueuePowerNotify - Remove power notify object

2.2.5.1 Initialize Power Notify

A power notify object can be initialized with the
KeInitializePowerNotify function:

VOID

KeInitializePowerNotify (

IN PKPOWER_NOTIFY PowerNotify,

IN PKNOTIFY_ROUTINE NotifyRoutine,

IN PVOID NotifyContext

);

Parameters:

PowerNotify - A pointer to a control object of type power notify.

NotifyRoutine - A pointer to a function that is to be called when power
is restored after a power failure.

NotifyContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure which will be
passed to the NotifyRoutine as a parameter.

The function specified by the NotifyRoutine parameter has the following
type definition:

typedef

VOID

(*PKNOTIFY_ROUTINE) (

IN PVOID NotifyContext

);

Parameters:

NotifyContext - A pointer to an arbitrary data structure that was
specified when the power notify object was initialized.

The power notify object data structure is initialized.

In order to actually have the specified function called when power is
restored after a failure, the power notify object must be inserted in
the power notify queue.

2.2.5.2 Insert Power Notify

A power notify object can be inserted in the power notify queue with the
KeInsertQueuePowerNotify function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertQueuePowerNotify (

IN PKPOWER_NOTIFY PowerNotify

);

Parameters:

PowerNotify - A pointer to a control object of type power notify.

If the specified power notify object is already in the power notify
queue (a boolean state variable records whether the power notify object
is in the power notify queue), then no operation is performed and a
function value of FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the power notify object
is inserted in the power notify queue and a function value of TRUE is
returned.

When the power is restored after a failure, the kernel scans the power
notify queue and calls the specified function.

2.2.5.3 Remove Power Notify

A power notify object can be removed from the power notify queue with
the KeRemoveQueuePowerNotify function:

BOOLEAN

KeRemoveQueuePowerNotify (

IN PKPOWER_NOTIFY PowerNotify

);

Parameters:

PowerNotify - A pointer to a control object of type power notify.

If the power notify object is not in the power notify queue (a boolean
state variable records whether the power notify object is in the power
notify queue), then no operation is performed and a function value of
FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the power notify object is removed from
the power notify queue and a function value of TRUE is returned.

2.2.6 Power Status Object

A power status object provides the capability to automatically have a
boolean state variable set to a value of TRUE when power is restored
after a power failure.

This object is intended for use by device drivers and other code which
needs to synchronize access to volatile register and device state such
that a power failure does not leave the registers or device in an
indeterminate state. The boolean value can be interrogated at critical
points during driver execution to determine whether a given operation
should be continued or restarted.

A power status object, when inserted in the power status queue, is a
one-shot operation. That is, the boolean variable will be set to a value
of TRUE exactly once after the power is restored. If it is desirable to
have the boolean variable set to a value of TRUE the next time that
power fails, then the power status object must be reinserted in the
power status queue.

Programming interfaces that support the power status object include:

KeInitializePowerStatus - Initialize status object

KeInsertQueuePowerStatus - Insert power status object

KeRemoveQueuePowerStatus - Remove power status object

2.2.6.1 Initialize Power Status

A power status object can be initialized with the
KeInitializePowerStatus function:

VOID

KeInitializePowerStatus (

IN PKPOWER_STATUS PowerStatus

);

Parameters:

PowerStatus - A pointer to a control object of type power status.

The power status object data structure is initialized.

In order to actually have a boolean variable set to a value of TRUE when
power is restored after a failure, the power status object must be
inserted in the power status queue.

2.2.6.2 Insert Power Status

A power status object can be inserted in the power status queue with the
KeInsertQueuePowerStatus function:

BOOLEAN

KeInsertQueuePowerStatus (

IN PKPOWER_STATUS PowerStatus,

IN PBOOLEAN Status

);

Parameters:

PowerStatus - A pointer to a control object of type power status.

Status - A pointer to a boolean variable that is to be set to a value of
TRUE when power is restored after a failure.

If the specified power status object is already in the power status
queue (a boolean state variable records whether the power status object
is in the power status queue), then no operation is performed and a
function value of FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the power status object
is inserted in the power status queue, the specified boolean variable is
set to a value of FALSE, and a function value of TRUE is returned.

When the power is restored after a failure, the kernel removes each
entry from the power status queue, sets the specified boolean variable
to a value of TRUE, and sets the inserted state of the power status
object to FALSE.

2.2.6.3 Remove Power Status

A power status object can be removed from the power status queue with
the KeRemoveQueuePowerStatus function:

BOOLEAN

KeRemoveQueuePowerStatus (

IN PKPOWER_STATUS PowerStatus

);

Parameters:

PowerStatus - A pointer to a control object of type power status.

If the power status object is not in the power status queue (a boolean
state variable records whether the power status object is in the power
status queue), then no operation is performed and a function value of
FALSE is returned. Otherwise, the power status object is removed from
the power status queue and a function value of TRUE is returned.

2.2.7 Process Object

A process object represents the virtual address space and control
information necessary for the execution of a set of thread objects.

A process object contains a pointer to an address map, a thread ready
list to hold thread objects while the process is not in the balance set,
a list of threads that are children of the process, the total
accumulated time for all threads executing within the process, a base
priority, and a default thread affinity.

A process object must be initialized before any thread objects can be
initialized that specify the process as their parent.

A process is either in the balance set (Included) or not in the balance
set (Excluded). When a process is in the balance set, then all threads
that are children of the process are eligible to be considered for
execution on a processor. When a process is not in the balance set, then
necessary pages are not locked in memory (e.g. thread kernel stacks) and
threads that are children of the process are not eligible for execution
on a processor.

The balance set is managed by the balance set manager; see also the
discussion under Thread Object.

A process cannot leave the balance set while any of its children threads
own mutexes. Therefore, when a process is selected for removal from the
balance set, any children threads that own mutexes are allowed to
continue execution until they release their last mutex. When this
occurs, execution of the thread is suspended and it is placed in the
process ready queue rather than returning to one of the dispatcher ready
queues. When no threads in the process own mutexes, then the process can
actually be removed from the balance set.

Programming interfaces that support the process object include:

KeInitializeProcess - Initialize a process object

KeAttachProcess - Attach process address space

KeDetachProcess - Detach process address space

KeExcludeProcess - Exclude process from balance set

KeIncludeProcess - Include process in balance set

KeSetPriorityProcess - Set priority of process object

2.2.7.1 Initialize Process

A process object can be initialized with the KeInitializeProcess
function:

VOID

KeInitializeProcess (

IN PKPROCESS Process,

IN KPRIORITY BasePriority,

IN KAFFINITY Affinity,

IN ULONG DirectoryTableBase,

IN BOOLEAN Enable

);

Parameters:

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

BasePriority - The base priority of the process.

Affinity - The set of processors on which children threads of the
process can execute.

DirectoryTableBase - The value that is to be loaded into the Directory
Table Base Register when a child thread of the process is dispatched for
execution.

Enable - A boolean variable that specifies the default handling mode for
data alignment exceptions in children threads.

The process object data structure is initialized with the specified base
priority, affinity, directory table base, and default alignment
exception handling mode. The process and thread quantum values are
initialized with system default values and the process is not considered
to be in the balance set.

The Enable parameter specifies the default handling mode for data
alignment exceptions in children threads. If this parameter is TRUE,
then user mode data alignment exceptions are automatically handled by
the kernel and are not raised as exceptions. Otherwise, user mode data
alignment exceptions are not handled by the kernel and may, or may not,
be raised as exceptions depending on host hardware capabilities.
Automatic handling of user data alignment exceptions means that the
kernel emulates misaligned data references and completes the offending
instructions as if no misalignment exception had occurred. Misaligned
references in kernel mode are never automatically handled and are always
raised as exceptions.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

Certain processors (e.g., the i386) always handle misaligned data in
hardware. On these processors, enabling or disabling the automatic
handling of data alignment exceptions has no effect. On other processors
(e.g., i486, MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP) the handling of
misaligned data is handled according to the mode established for the
respective thread.

2.2.7.2 Attach Process

A thread can attach to another process's address space with the
KeAttachProcess function:

VOID

KeAttachProcess (

IN PKPROCESS Process

);

Parameters:

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

Attaching to another process's address space causes the subject thread
to leave the parent process's address space and enter the address space
of the target process. This provides the capability for one thread to
alter the address space and resources of another process without having
complicated data structures or locking protocols.

All of the resources of the target process can be accessed and
manipulated by the subject thread while the thread is executing in the
target process's address space. This includes the process object table,
process private mapping information, working set, etc.

A thread can only attach to one address space at a time. If an attempt
is made to attach to a second process's address space while the thread
is already attached to another process's address space, then a bug check
will occur. In addition, a thread cannot own any mutexes when it
attaches to another process's address space. An attempt to do will also
cause a bug check to occur.

Attaching to another process's address causes the current APC state of
the subject thread to be saved and a new state initialized. While the
thread is executing in the attached process's address space, it can
receive APCs that were initiated in that address space. APCs that were
initiated in the parent process's address space are queued, but not
delivered until the thread returns to the parent process's address
space.

Attaching to another process's address space does not cause the kernel
stack of the subject thread to be locked in memory while the target
process is in the balance set. Therefore, both the source and target
processes are not allowed to leave the balance set while a thread has
the target process's address space attached. This is accomplished by
incrementing the process mutex count of both the source and target
processes. Artificially incrementing this count prevents each of the
processes from being removed from the balance set until their respective
counts go to zero. In addition, a thread that has another process's
address space attached is allowed to continue execution as if it owned a
mutex, if one of the processes is selected for removal from the balance
set by the balance set manager.

The execution time of a thread that has another process's address space
attached is charged to the target process.

This service will be used by the executive to alter the address map of
another process.

2.2.7.3 Detach Process

A thread can detach from another process's address space with the
KeDetachProcess function:

VOID

KeDetachProcess (

);

Detaching from another process's address space causes the subject thread
to return to the parent process's address space.

If an attempt is made to detach from another process's address space
when the subject thread does not have another process's address space
attached, then a bug check will occur. In addition, if a kernel APC is
in progress, the kernel APC queue contains an entry, the user APC queue
contains an entry, or the thread owns one or more mutexes, then a bug
check will also occur.

Detaching from another process's address space causes the saved APC
state to be restored and the process mutex counts to be adjusted. If the
kernel APC queue is not empty, then an APC_LEVEL software interrupt is
requested which will cause the kernel mode APCs to get delivered as
appropriate.

2.2.7.4 Exclude Process

A process object can be excluded from the balance set with the
KeExcludeProcess function:

BOOLEAN

KeExcludeProcess (

IN PKPROCESS Process

);

Parameters:

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

The specified process is excluded from the balance set and its children
threads will be removed from further consideration by the thread
dispatcher when they no longer own any mutexes and do not have another
process's address space attached.

A value of TRUE is returned as the function value, if the process can be
immediately removed from the balance set (i.e., none of its children
threads own any mutexes or have any address spaces attached). Otherwise,
a value of FALSE is returned and the caller must wait on the process's
balance set event to determine the exact point when the process can be
removed from the balance set.

Processors on which children threads are running (Running state) or
about to run (Standby state) are forced to redispatch if their
respective threads do not own any mutexes and are not attached to
another process's address space.

As ready threads are considered for execution, a test is made to
determine if the thread's process is in the balance set. If the thread
does not own any mutexes, is not attached to another process' address
space, and its parent process is excluded from the balance set, then the
thread is removed from its dispatcher ready queue and inserted in the
process ready queue. The process ready queue is scanned when the process
reenters the balance set and any threads in the process's ready queue
are rereadied for execution.

This function is intended for use by the balance set manager.

2.2.7.5 Include Process

A process object can be included in the balance set with the
KeIncludeProcess function:

VOID

KeIncludeProcess (

IN PKPROCESS Process

);

Parameters:

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

The specified process is included in the balance set and the process's
ready queue is scanned. The process ready queue is a list of threads
that are ready to run, but which were moved to the process ready queue
when they were encountered in one of the dispatcher ready queues. Each
thread in the list is removed and readied for execution.

This function is intended for use by the balance set manager.

2.2.7.6 Set Priority Process

The base priority of a process object can be set with the
KeSetPriorityProcess function:

KPRIORITY

KeSetPriorityProcess (

IN PKPROCESS Process,

IN KPRIORITY BasePriority

);

Parameters:

Process - A pointer to a control object of type process.

BasePriority - The new base priority of the process object.

The base priority of the specified process is set to the specified value
and the priority of all the process's children threads are adjusted as
appropriate.

If the new priority is in the realtime class, then the priority of each
child thread is set to the new base priority.

If the new priority is in the variable class, then the priority of each
thread is computed by taking the current priority of the thread,
subtracting out the old base priority, and then adding the new base
priority. The computed value is not allowed to cross into the realtime
class or go below a priority of 1.

2.2.7.7 Process Accounting Data

As children threads within a process execute, their runtime is
accumulated in the parent process object. The units of this summation
are clock ticks.

2.2.8 Profile Object

A profile object provides the capability to measure the distribution of
execution time within a block of code. Both user and system code may be
profiled.

Each profile object has three key attributes. First, a profile object
applies to an address range or a set of address ranges. The address
range is specified by the RangeBase, RangeSize, and Process parameters.
RangeBase and RangeSize select a range of bytes (that is, the area of
code) on which to collect profile data. This range is within the address
space described by the Process parameter. A given profile object either
profiles a single address range within a single address space (i.e.,
applies to one process) or profiles the same single address range across
all processes in the system.

Second, a profile object divides the address range being profiled into
buckets. Each time a program counter (PC) sample shows the PC to be in
one of these buckets, the corresponding counter is incremented. The
BucketSize parameter controls the size of these buckets.

Third, a profile object reports the number of sampling hits for any
given bucket in the corresponding counter. Counters reside in the buffer
associated with the profile object when it is created.

Profiling works by sampling the processors PC using a periodic
interrupt. The handler for the profiling interrupt searches the list of
active profile objects for those with address ranges that match the PC.
(I.e., the sampled PC falls within the address range associated with the
profile object, and the current process matches the process associated
with the profile object.) For each matching profile object, the bucket
is computed, and the counter corresponding to the bucket is updated.

When profiling is off, it consumes no processor cycles, and thus may be
present in any system. When turned on, the burden it places on the
system is inversely proportional to the profiling interval set with
KeSetIntervalProfile and proportional to the number of active (started)
profile objects. A small number of profile objects may be active at any
one time.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE:

On symmetric MP machines, profiling interrupts occur on all processors
(at the same rate). On asymmetric machines (i.e., the SystemPro) slave
processors do NOT do profiling.

Programming interfaces that support the profile object include:

KeInitializeProfile - Initialize a profile object

KeStartProfile - Start data collection for a profile object

KeStopProfile - Stop data collection for a profile object

KeSetIntervalProfile - Set length of profile interval (globally)

KeQueryIntervalProfile - Query length of profile interval

2.2.8.1 Initialize Profile

A profile object is initialized with KeInitializeProfile.

VOID

KeInitializeProfile (

IN PKPROFILE Profile,

IN PKPROCESS Process OPTIONAL,

IN PVOID RangeBase,

IN ULONG RangeSize,

IN ULONG BucketSize

);

Parameters:

Profile - A pointer to a control object of type profile.

Process - If specified, a pointer to a kernel process object that
describes the address space to profile. If not specified, then all
address spaces are included in the profile.

RangeBase - Address of the first byte of the address range for which
profiling information is to be collected.

RangeSize - Size of the address range for which profiling information is
to be collected. The RangeBase and RangeSize parameters are interpreted
such that RangeBase <= address < RangeBase+RangeSize generates a profile
hit.

BucketSize - Log base 2 of the size of a profiling bucket. Thus,
BucketSize = 2 yields 4-byte buckets, BucketSize = 7 yields 128-byte
buckets. All profile hits in a given bucket increment the corresponding
counter in Buffer. Buckets cannot be smaller than a ULONG.

The profile object is initialized with the specified parameter values,
and its state is set to stopped. KeStartProfile must be called to
actually start profiling.

2.2.8.2 Start Profile

KeStartProfile must be called to start gathering data for a profile
object.

BOOLEAN

KeStartProfile (

IN PKPROFILE Profile,

IN PULONG Buffer

);

Parameters:

Profile - A pointer to a control object of type profile.

Buffer - Array of ULONGs. Each ULONG is a hit counter, which records the
number of hits in the corresponding bucket. The Buffer must be
accessible at DPC_LEVEL and above.

The value TRUE is returned if the profile object is successfully
started. FALSE is returned if the object is already in the started
state. An exception (STATUS_INSUFFICIENT_RESOURCES) is raised if there
are insufficient resources available to make the profile active.

2.2.8.3 Stop Profile

KeStopProfile is called to stop gathering data for a profile object.

BOOLEAN

KeStopProfile (

IN PKPROFILE Profile

);

Parameters:

Profile - A pointer to a control object of type profile.

TRUE is returned if the profile is successfully stopped, FALSE if it is
not already in the started state. Once a profile is stopped, no more
updates are written into its buffer.

2.2.8.4 Set System Profile Interval

The time interval between profile interrupts (and thus the profiling
rate) is set by calling KeSetIntervalProfile.

VOID

KeSetIntervalProfile (

IN ULONG Interval

);

Parameters:

Interval - The sampling interval in 100ns units.

The actual interval set by the system is the closest available, but may
differ significantly. KeQueryIntervalProfile returns the actual value in
use by the system.

The value is set globally; it affects all profiles on all processors.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE:

PC-based i386 and i486 machines offer sampling intervals from about
10,000 units (1 millisecond) to 300 units (30 microseconds).

2.2.8.5 Query System Profile Interval

KeQueryIntervalProfile returns the current profile sampling interval.

ULONG

KeQueryIntervalProfile (

);

The current profile sampling interval is returned in units of 100ns.
This is the value the system is actually using, and thus may be
different from the value set with KeSetIntervalProfile.

3. Wait Operations

Threads synchronize their access to dispatcher objects with
object-specific functions and the generic kernel Wait functions. When a
thread desires to wait until a dispatcher object attains a Signaled
state, it executes one of the kernel Wait functions specifying the
dispatcher object as a parameter. If the dispatcher object is not
currently in a Signaled state, then the kernel puts the thread in a
Waiting state and selects another thread to run on the current
processor.

At some future point, a cooperating thread or system operation will
cause the specified dispatcher object to attain a state of Signaled.
When this occurs, the thread will be given a priority boost and enter
the Ready state. The thread will be dispatched for execution according
to its priority.

The kernel Wait functions also allow a thread to wait on more than one
dispatcher object at a time. The conditions under which the Wait will be
satisfied can be specified as WaitAny or WaitAll.

If WaitAny is specified, then the Wait will be satisfied when any of the
objects attain a state of Signaled. If WaitAll is specified, then the
Wait will not be satisfied until all of the objects concurrently attain
a state of Signaled.

Each Wait operation can optionally specify a timeout value. If a timeout
value is specified, then the Wait will be automatically satisfied if the
timeout period is exceeded without the Wait being satisfied in the
normal manner.

If a timeout value of zero is specified, then no wait will actually
occur, but an attempt will be made to satisfy the Wait immediately. If
the Wait can be satisfied, then all side effects are performed (e.g.
acquiring a mutex). Otherwise, no side effects are performed.

Wait operations can be alertable or nonalertable. If a wait is alertable
and the subject thread is alerted while it is waiting, then the wait
will be satisifed with a completion status of STATUS_ALERTED.

Wait operations also take a processor mode as a parameter which
specifies on whose behalf the Wait is actually occurring. This is
required since executive code itself performs the Wait operation and the
previous mode of the processor is not necessarily the correct mode. This
mode determines what happens when the subject thread is alerted or an
APC is queued while the thread is in a Waiting state.

Each Wait operation also takes a Wait reason as a parameter. The Wait
reason is an enumerated type supplied by the kernel and is used for
debugging system code and for system management functions (i.e., it will
be possible to display the reason a thread is in a Waiting state).

Programming interfaces that support wait operations include:

KeWaitForMultipleObjects - Wait for dispatcher objects

KeWaitForSingleObject - Wait for one dispatcher object

3.1 Wait For Multiple Objects

A thread can wait for a set of dispatcher objects with the
KeWaitForMultipleObjects function:

NTSTATUS

KeWaitForMultipleObjects (

IN CCHAR Count,

IN PVOID Objects[],

IN WAIT_TYPE WaitType,

IN KWAIT_REASON WaitReason,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE WaitMode,

IN BOOLEAN Alertable,

IN PTIME Timeout OPTIONAL,

IN PKWAIT_BLOCK WaitBlockArray OPTIONAL

);

Parameters:

Count - A count of the number of objects that are to be waited on.

Objects - An array of pointers to dispatcher objects.

WaitType - The type of wait operation that is to be performed (WaitAny
or WaitAll).

WaitReason - The reason for the Wait.

WaitMode - The processor mode on whose behalf the Wait is occurring.

Alertable - A boolean value that specifies whether the Wait is
alertable.

Timeout - An optional pointer to timeout value that specifies the
absolute or relative time over which the Wait is to be completed.

WaitBlockArray - An optional pointer to an array of wait blocks that are
to be used to describe the wait operation.

Each thread object has a builtin array of wait blocks that can be used
to wait on multiple objects concurrently. Whenever possible, the builtin
array of wait blocks should be used in a wait multiple operation since
no additional wait block storage need be allocated and later
deallocated. However, if the number of objects to be waited on
concurrently is greater than the number of builtin wait blocks, then the
WaitBlockArray parameter can be used to specify an alternate set of wait
blocks to be used in the wait operation.

If the WaitBlockArray parameter is not specified, then the Count
parameter must be less than or equal to THREAD_WAIT_OBJECTS which
defines the number of builtin wait objects. If the WaitBlockArray
parameter is not specified and the Count parameter is greater than
THREAD_WAIT_BLOCKS, then a bug check will occur.

If the WaitBlockArray parameter is specified, then the Count parameter
must be less than or equal to MAXIMUM_WAIT_OBJECTS which is the maximum
number of objects that can be waited on concurrently. If the
WaitBlockParameter is specified and the Count parameter is greater than
MAXIMUM_WAIT_OBJECTS, then a bug check will occur.

The current state for each of the specified objects is examined to
determine if the Wait can be satisfied immediately. If the Wait can be
satisfied, then necessary side effects are performed on the objects and
an appropriate value is returned as the function value. If the Wait
cannot be satisfied immediately, and either no timeout value or a
nonzero timeout value is specified, then the current thread is put in a
Waiting state and a new thread is selected for execution on the current
processor.

The WaitType parameter specifies the type of wait operation that is to
be performed. If the WaitType is WaitAll, then all of the specified
objects must attain a state of Signaled before the Wait will be
satisfied. If the WaitType is WaitAny, then any of the objects must
attain a state of Signaled before the Wait will be satisifed.

The reason for the Wait is set to the value specified by the WaitReason
parameter.

The WaitMode parameter specifies on whose behalf the Wait is occurring.

The Alertable parameter specifies whether the thread can be alerted
while it is in the Waiting state. If the value of this parameter is TRUE
and the thread is alerted for a mode that is equal to or more privileged
than the Wait mode, then the thread's Wait will be satisfied with a
completion status of STATUS_ALERTED.

If the WaitMode parameter is UserMode and the Alertable parameter TRUE,
then the thread can also be awakened to deliver a user mode APC. Kernel
mode APCs always cause the subject thread to be awakened if the Wait
IRQL is zero and there is not a kernel APC in progress.

The Timeout parameter is optional. If a timeout value is specified, then
the Wait will be automatically satisfied if the timeout occurs before
the specified Wait conditions are met.

If a zero timeout value is specified, then the Wait will not actually
Wait regardless of whether it can be satisfied or not. An explicit
timeout value of zero allows for the testing of a set of Wait
conditions, and conditionally performing any side effects if the Wait
can be immediately satisifed (e.g. the acquisition of a mutex).

The expiration time of the timeout is expressed as either an absolute
time at which the Wait is to be automatically satisifed, or a time that
is relative to the current system time. If the value of the Timeout
parameter is negative, then the expiration time is relative. Otherwise,
the expiration time is absolute.

The values returned by the KeWaitForMultipleObjects function determine
how the Wait was satisfied.

A value in the range of zero to Count minus one is returned if the Wait
is satisfied by one or more of the dispatcher objects specified by the
Objects parameter and none of the dispatcher objects satisfying the Wait
is an abandoned mutant object. The actual value returned is the index of
the object (zero based) in the Objects array that satisfied the Wait.

A value in the range of STATUS_ABANDONED to STATUS_ABANDONED plus Count
minus one is returned if the Wait is satisfied by one or more of the
dispatcher objects specified by the Objects parameter and one or more of
the dispatcher objects satisfying the Wait is an abandoned mutant
object. The actual value returned is the index of the object (zero
based) in the Objects array that satisfied the Wait plus the value of
STATUS_ABANDONED.

A value of STATUS_ALERTED is returned if the Wait was completed because
the thread was alerted.

If a value of STATUS_TIMEROUT is returned, then timeout occurred before
the specified set of wait conditions were met. Note that this value can
be returned when an explicit timeout value of zero is specified and the
specified set of wait conditions cannot be immediately met.

A value of STATUS_USER_APC is returned if a user mode APC is to be
delivered.

3.2 Wait For Single Object

A thread can wait for a single dispatcher object with the
KeWaitForSingleObject function:

NTSTATUS

KeWaitForSingleObject (

IN PVOID Object,

IN KWAIT_REASON WaitReason,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE WaitMode,

IN BOOLEAN Alertable,

IN PTIME Timeout OPTIONAL

);

Parameters:

Object - A pointer to a dispatcher object.

WaitReason - The reason for the Wait.

WaitMode - The processor mode on whose behalf the Wait is occurring.

Alertable - A boolean value that specifies whether the Wait is
alertable.

Timeout - An optional pointer to timeout value that specifies the
absolute or relative time over which the Wait is to be completed.

The current state of the specified object is examined to determine if
the Wait can be satisfied immediately. If the Wait can be satisfied,
then necessary side effects are performed on the object and an
appropriate value is returned as the function value. If the Wait cannot
be satisfied immediately, and either no timeout value or a nonzero
timeout value is specified, then the current thread is put in a Waiting
state and a new thread is selected for execution on the current
processor.

The reason for the Wait is set to the value specified by the WaitReason
parameter.

The WaitMode parameter specifies on whose behalf the Wait is occurring.

The Alertable parameter specifies whether the thread can be alerted
while it is in the Waiting state. If the value of this parameter is TRUE
and the thread is alerted for a mode that is equal to or more privileged
than the Wait mode, then the thread's Wait will be satisfied with a
completion status of STATUS_ALERTED.

If the WaitMode parameter is UserMode and the Alertable parameter TRUE,
then the thread can also be awakened to deliver a user mode APC. Kernel
mode APCs always cause the subject thread to be awakened if the Wait
IRQL is zero and there is not a kernel APC in progress.

The Timeout parameter is optional. If a timeout value is specified, then
the Wait will be automatically satisfied if the timeout occurs before
the specified Wait conditions are met.

If a zero timeout value is specified, then the Wait will not actually
Wait regardless of whether it can be satisfied or not. An explicit
timeout value of zero allows for the testing of a set of Wait
conditions, and conditionally performing any side effects if the Wait
can be immediately satisifed (e.g. the acquisition of a mutex).

The expiration time of the timeout is expressed as either an absolute
time at which the Wait is to be automatically satisifed, or a time that
is relative to the current system time. If the value of the Timeout
parameter is negative, then the expiration time is relative. Otherwise,
the expiration time is absolute.

The values returned by the KeWaitForSingleObject function determine how
the Wait was satisfied.

A value of STATUS_SUCCESS is returned if the dispatcher object specified
by the Object parameter satisfied the Wait.

A value of STATUS_ABANDONED is returned if the dispatcher object
specified by the Object parameter satisfied the Wait and is a mutant
object that was previously abandoned.

A value of STATUS_ALERTED is returned if the Wait was completed because
the thread was alerted.

If a value of STATUS_TIMEOUT is returned, then timeout occurred before
the specified wait condition was met. Note that this value can be
returned when an explicit timeout value of zero is specified and the
specified set of wait conditions cannot be immediately met.

A value of STATUS_USER_APC is returned if a user mode APC is to be
delivered.

4. Miscellaneous Operations

Several miscellaneous functions are provided to perform hardware-related
operations and to provide the operations necessary to debug a
multiprocessor operating system.

The exact implementation for some of these operations varies, depending
on the particular host architecture. Implementation notes have been
provided for these functions.

Programming interfaces that support miscellaneous operations include:

KeBugCheck - Generate bug check halt

KeContextFromKframes - Move machine state to context frames

KeContextToKframes - Move machine state from context frames

KeFillEntryTb - Fill translation buffer entry

KeFlushDcache - Flush data cache

KeFlushEntireTb - Flush entire translation buffer

KeFlushIcache - Flush instruction cache

KeFlushIoBuffers - Flush I/O buffers from the data cache

KeFlushSingleTb - Flush single translation buffer entry

KeFreezeExecution - Freeze processor execution

KeGetCurrentApcEnvironment - Get the current APC environment

KeGetCurrentIrql - Get the current IRQL

KeGetPreviousMode - Get previous processor mode

KeLowerIrql - Lower the current IRQL to the specified value

KeQuerySystemTime - Query the current system time

KeRaiseIrql - Raise the current IRQL to the specified value

KeRundownThread - Run down thread before termination

KeSetSystemTime - Set the current system time

KeStallExecutionProcessor - Stall processor execution

KeUnFreezeExecution - Unfreeze processor execution

4.1 Bug Check

A bug check halt can be generated with the KeBugCheck function:

VOID

KeBugCheck (

IN ULONG BugCheckCode

);

Parameters:

BugCheckCode - A value that specifies the reason for the bug check.

A bug check is a system-detected error that causes a controlled shutdown
of the system. The various kernel mode components of the system perform
online consistency checking. When an inconsistency is discovered, a bug
check is generated.

4.2 Context Frame Manipulation

The kernel trap handler is responsible for saving and restoring machine
state when an interrupt, exception, system call, or other trapping
condition is detected by system hardware.

Depending on the type of trapping condition, the trap handler may save
only the volatile register state, or may save both the volatile and the
nonvolatile register state. In addition, the previous processor state
and floating point status are also saved.

This state information is saved on the kernel stack in the form of a
call frame. Separate call frames are used to store the volatile and the
nonvolatile register state. These frames are called the trap frame and
exception frame respectively.

A third structure, called a context frame, is constructed from the
information contained in the trap and exception frames. This structure
contains the complete machine state for a thread of execution.

A context frame is used to specify the initial machine state of a
thread, to save the previous machine state when an exception handler is
invoked, and to continue the execution of a thread after an exception
has been handled.

The kernel supplies two routines to marshal information to/from a
context frame.

4.2.1 Move Machine State To Context Frame

Saved machine state can be moved from a trap frame and/or an exception
frame to a context frame with the KeContextFromKframes function:

VOID

KeContextFromKframes (

IN PKTRAP_FRAME TrapFrame,

IN PKEXCEPTION_FRAME ExceptionFrame,

IN OUT PCONTEXT ContextFrame

);

Parameters:

TrapFrame - A pointer to a trap frame.

ExceptionFrame - A pointer to an exception frame.

ContextFrame - A pointer to a context frame.

Saved machine state is moved from the specified trap frame and/or the
specified exception frame to the specified context frame. The
ContextFlags field of the context frame controls the information that is
moved.

ContextFlags Field

CONTEXT_CONTROL - Specifies that the processor state information from
the trap frame is to be moved to the context frame.

CONTEXT_FLOATING_POINT - Specifies that the floating point register
state from the trap and exception frames is to be moved to the context
frame.

CONTEXT_INTEGER - Specifies that the integer register state from the
trap and exception frames is to be moved to the context frame.

CONTEXT_PIPELINE - Specifies that the floating point pipe state is to be
moved from the trap frame to the context frame.

CONTEXT_FULL - Specifies that all of the state information from the trap
and exception frames is to be moved to the context frame.

4.2.2 Move Machine State From Context Frame

Saved machine state can be moved from a context frame to a trap frame
and/or an exception frame with the KeContextToKframes function:

VOID

KeContextToKframes (

IN OUT PKTRAP_FRAME TrapFrame,

IN OUT PKEXCEPTION_FRAME ExceptionFrame,

IN PCONTEXT ContextFrame,

IN ULONG ContextFlags,

IN KPROCESSOR_MODE PreviousMode

);

Parameters:

TrapFrame - A pointer to a trap frame.

ExceptionFrame - A pointer to an exception frame.

ContextFrame - A pointer to a context frame.

ContextFlags - A set of flags that specifies the state information that
is to be moved from the specified context frame to the specified trap
frame and/or the specified exception frame.

ContextFlags Flags

CONTEXT_CONTROL - Specifies that the processor state information from
the context frame is to be moved to the trap frame.

CONTEXT_FLOATING_POINT - Specifies that the floating point register
state from the context frame is to be moved to the trap and exception
frames.

CONTEXT_INTEGER - Specifies that the integer register state from the
context frame is to be moved to the trap and exception frames.

CONTEXT_PIPELINE - Specifies that the floating point pipe state is to be
moved from the context frame to the trap frame.

CONTEXT_FULL - Specifies that all of the state information from the
context frame is to be moved to the trap and exception frames.

PreviousMode - The processor mode for which the context frame is
specified.

Saved machine state is moved from the specified context frame to the
specified trap frame and/or the specified exception frame. The
ContextFlags parameter specifies the information that is to be moved.
The PreviousMode parameter determines which bits the caller may specify
if the processor state information is being moved to the trap frame.

4.3 Fill Entry Translation Buffer

A page table entry can be inserted into the translation buffer of the
current processor with the KeFillEntryTb function:

VOID

KeFillEntryTb (

IN HARDWARE_PTE Pte[1],

IN PVOID Virtual,

IN BOOLEAN Invalid

);

Parameters:

Pte - A pointer to a page table entry, or a pair of page table entries,
that are to be inserted into the translation buffer of the current
processor.

Virtual - The virtual address that corresponds to the first page table
entry.

Invalid - A boolean value that determines whether a translation buffer
entry should be invalidated if the host architecture does not provide a
software-managed translation buffer.

This function is intended for use by memory management software for the
following cases:

1. A page table entry transitions from the invalid to the valid state.

2. A page table entry transitions from the unmodified (clean) to the
modified (dirty) state.

3. A page table entry transitions from the unaccessed to the accessed
state.

None of these transitions affects other processors in the configuration;
however, they provide the opportunity to optimize the filling of the
translation buffer on systems that have a software-managed translation
buffer.

If the page table entry is transitioning from the invalid to the valid
state, then the Invalid parameter should be FALSE. Otherwise, the
Invalid parameter should be TRUE.

If the specified virtual address is already mapped by the translation
buffer, then the contents of the specified page table entry(s) replace
the page table entry in the translation buffer. Otherwise, a new
translation buffer entry is created that maps the specified virtual
address.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

The Intel i860 does not have a software-managed translation buffer. It
also cannot invalidate a single translation buffer entry. Therefore, if
the Invalid parameter is TRUE, then the entire translation buffer is
invalidated. Otherwise, no operation is performed.

The Intel i386 and i486 do not have a software-managed translation
buffer. Also neither of these processors can invalidate a single
translation buffer entry. Therefore, if the Invalid parameter is TRUE,
the entire translation buffer is invalidated. Otherwise, no operation is
performed.

\ The i486 can invalidate a single translation buffer entry, but it is
not yet supported. \

The MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP have software-managed translation
buffers. Therefore, the specified page table entry either replaces the
current translation buffer entry or a new translation buffer entry is
created to map the specified virtual address.

4.4 Flush Data Cache

The data cache can be flushed on all processors, or only that set of
processors that are currently executing threads that belong to the
current thread's process with the KeFlushDcache function:

VOID

KeFlushDcache (

IN BOOLEAN AllProcessors

);

Parameters:

AllProcessors - A boolean value that determines which data caches are to
be flushed.

This function is intended for use by memory management and device driver
software to keep the data cache coherent with DMA I/O operations.

If the AllProcessors parameter is TRUE, then the data cache is flushed
on all processors in the system. Otherwise, only the data caches on
processors running threads that belong to the current thread's process
are flushed.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

The Intel i860 employs a writeback data cache with virtual tags that
does not maintain coherency with DMA I/O operations. Therefore, this
function must flush the data cache.

The Intel i386 and i486 employ data caches that maintain coherency with
I/O operations. Therefore, this function performs no operation.

The MIPS r3000 and r4000SP employ data caches that do not maintain
coherency with I/O operations. Therefore, the data cache must be flushed
for this function.

The MIPS r4000MP employs a data cache that maintains coherency with I/O
operations. Therefore, this function performs no operation.

4.5 Flush Entire Translation Buffer

The entire translation buffer can be flushed on all processors, or only
that set of processors that are currently executing threads that belong
to the current thread's process with the KeFlushEntireTb function:

VOID

KeFlushEntireTb (

IN BOOLEAN Invalid,

IN BOOLEAN AllProcessors

);

Parameters:

Invalid - A boolean value that specifies why the translation buffer is
being flushed.

AllProcessors - A boolean value that determines which translation
buffers are to be flushed.

This function is intended for use by memory management software when
virtual pages are deleted, removed from the process working set, or
their protection is changed. Normally, the entire translation buffer is
not flushed when virtual pages are removed from the process working set.
However, when a number of pages are removed all at once, it is more
efficient to simply flush the entire translation buffer rather than
flush individual entries.

If the value of the Invalid parameter is TRUE, then the translation
buffer is being flushed because one or more pages have become invalid
and not present in memory. If the value of the Invalid parameter is
FALSE, then the translation buffer is being flushed because the
protection on one or more pages has been changed.

If the AllProcessors parameter is TRUE, then the entire translation
buffer is flushed on all processors in the system. Otherwise, only the
translation buffers on processors running threads that belong to the
current thread's process are flushed.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE:

The Intel i860 employs a data cache with virtual tags. It also cannot
flush the translation buffer without also flushing the instruction
cache. If the Invalid parameter is TRUE, then the data cache is flushed
in addition to flushing the instruction cache and invalidating the
translation buffer. Otherwise, the instruction cache is flushed and the
translation buffer is invalidated.

The Intel i386 and i486 flush the translation buffer for this function.

The MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP flush the random part of the
software-managed translation buffer for this function. The fixed part of
the translation buffer is not affected.

4.6 Flush Instruction Cache

The instruction cache can be flushed on all processors, or only that set
of processors that are currently executing threads that belong to the
current thread's process with the KeFlushIcache function:

VOID

KeFlushIcache (

IN BOOLEAN AllProcessors

);

Parameters:

AllProcessors - A boolean value that determines which instruction caches
are to be flushed.

This function is intended for use by system debuggers. When a breakpoint
is inserted in system code, the instruction caches of all processors in
the system must be flushed. If a breakpoint is placed in process code,
then only the instruction caches of processors executing threads that
belong to current thread's process need to be flushed.

The executive also exports this function for use by code that modifies
the instruction stream. After each such modification, and before
attempting to execute the modified instructions, the instruction cache
must be flushed.

If the AllProcessors parameter is TRUE, then the instruction cache is
flushed on all processors in the system. Otherwise, only the instruction
caches on processors running threads that belong to the current thread's
process are flushed.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

The Intel i860 does not maintain coherency between the data and
instruction caches. It also cannot flush the instruction cache without
invalidating the translation buffer. Therefore, the instruction cache is
flushed and the translation buffer is invalidated for this function.

The Intel i386 and i486 maintain coherency between the data and
instruction caches. Therefore, no operation is performed for this
function.

The MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP do not maintain coherency between
the instruction and data caches. Therefore, the instruction cache is
flushed for this function.

4.7 Flush I/O Buffers

The memory region occupied by an I/O buffer can be flushed from both the
instruction and data caches of all processors in the system with the
KeFlushIoBuffers function:

VOID

KeFlushIoBuffers (

IN PMDL Mdl,

IN BOOLEAN ReadOperation

);

Parameters:

Mdl - A pointer to a memory descriptor list that describes the areas of
memory occupied by the I/O buffer.

ReadOperation - A boolean value that determines whether the flush is
being performed for a read operation.

This function is intended for use by device drivers and affects all
processors in the system.

If the ReadOperation parameter is TRUE, then the I/O operation is
reading information into memory that may be valid in the instruction and
data caches. If the ReadOperation parameter is FALSE, then the I/O
operation is writing data from memory to a device and information may be
present in the data cache and not in memory.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

The Intel i860 employs a writeback data cache and an instruction cache
that do not maintain coherency with I/O operations. Therefore, the data
cache must be flushed for both read and write operations. The Intel i860
also cannot flush the instruction cache without invalidating the
translation buffer. Therefore, if the ReadOperation parameter is TRUE,
then the instruction cache is flushed and the translation buffer is also
invalidated for this function.

The Intel i386 and i486 maintain data and instruction cache coherency
with I/O operations. Therefore, no operation is performed for this
function.

\ The i486 has a write buffer which may have to be flushed before all
I/O operations. \

The MIPS r3000 employs a write-through data cache and does not maintain
coherency with I/O operations for either of the instruction or data
caches. Therefore, if the ReadOperation parameter is TRUE, then both the
instruction and data caches must be flushed. Otherwise, no operation is
performed for this function.

\ The r3000 has a write buffer which must be flushed before all I/O
operations. \

The MIPS r4000SP employs a writeback data cache and an instruction cache
that do not maintain coherency with I/O operations. Therefore, the data
cache must be flushed for both read and write operations. In addition,
if the ReadOperation parameter is TRUE, then the instruction cache is
also flushed for this function.

The MIPS r4000MP employs a writeback data cache that maintains coherency
with I/O operations. However, cache coherency is not maintained for the
instruction cache with I/O operations. Therefore, if the ReadOperation
parameter is TRUE, then the instruction cache is flushed. Otherwise, no
operation is performed for this function.

4.8 Flush Single Translation Buffer Entry

A single entry can be flushed from the translation buffer of all
processors, or only that set of processors that are currently executing
threads that belong to the current thread's process with the
KeFlushSingleTb function:

HARDWARE_PTE

KeFlushSingleTb (

IN PVOID Virtual,

IN BOOLEAN Invalid,

IN BOOLEAN AllProcessors,

IN PHARDWARE_PTE PtePointer,

IN HARDWARE_PTE PteValue

);

Parameters:

Virtual - A virtual address that is within the page whose translation
buffer entry is to be flushed.

Invalid - A boolean value that specifies why the translation buffer is
being flushed.

AllProcessors - A boolean value that determines which translation
buffers are to be flushed.

PtePointer - A Pointer to a page table entry which is to be updated with
the new PteValue.

PteValue - The new Pte value.

Return Value:

The contents of the page table entry PtePointer refers to before the
entry is set to PteValue.

This function is intended for use by virtual memory management software
when a virtual page is deleted, removed from the process working set, or
its protection is changed. If several virtual pages are removed from a
process's address space at once or their protection is changed, then it
may be more efficient to use the KeFlushEntireTb function.

If the value of the Invalid parameter is TRUE, then the translation
buffer is being flushed because a page has become invalid and is not
present in memory. If the value of the Invalid parameter is FALSE, then
the translation buffer is being flushed because the protection on a page
has been changed.

If the AllProcessors parameter is TRUE, then the specified translation
buffer entry is flushed on all processors in the system. Otherwise, only
the specified translation buffer entry on process running threads that
belong to the current thread's processor are flushed.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE:

The Intel i860 employs a data cache with virtual tags. It also cannot
invalidate a single entry from the translation buffer nor can it
invalidate the translation buffer without also flushing the instruction
cache. If the Invalid parameter is TRUE, then the data cache is flushed
in addition to flushing the instruction cache and invalidating the
translation buffer. Otherwise, the instruction cache is flushed and the
translation buffer is invalidated.

The Intel i386 and i486 cannot flush a single entry from the translation
buffer. Therefore, the entire translation buffer is invalidated for this
function.

\ The i486 can invalidate a single translation buffer entry, but it is
not yet supported. \

The MIPS r3000, r4000SP, and r4000MP provide the capability to flush a
single entry from the random part of the software-managed translation
buffer. Therefore, a single translation buffer entry is invalidated for
this function.

4.9 Freeze Execution

The execution of all other processors in the system, excluding the
current processor, can be frozen with the KeFreezeExecution function:

KIRQL

KeFreezeExecution (

);

The IRQL is raised to the highest level, the execution of all other
processors in the host configuration is frozen, and the previous IRQL is
returned as the function value.

This function does not return control to the caller until the execution
of all other processors has been frozen. It is intended for use by
system debuggers and should be called whenever the debugger is entered
so that a consistent picture of the multiprocessor system can be
examined and modified.

4.10 Get Current APC Environment

The APC execution environment for the current thread can be obtained
with the KeGetCurrentApcEnvironment function:

KAPC_ENVIRONMENT

KeGetCurrentApcEnvironment (

);

The APC execution environment is obtained from the current thread and
returned as the function value.

Possible values that can be returned by this function include:

o OriginalApcEnvironment - The current APC environment is the thread's
parent process.

o AttachedApcEnvironment - The current APC environment is a process that
has been attached by the current thread.

4.11 Get Current IRQL

The current IRQL can be obtained with the KeGetCurrentIrql function:

KIRQL

KeGetCurrentIrql (

);

The current IRQL is returned as the function value.

4.12 Get Previous Mode

The previous processor mode can be obtained with the KeGetPreviousMode
function:

KPROCESSOR_MODE

KeGetPreviousMode (

);

The previous processor mode is obtained from the processor status. This
function can be used to determine the previous processor mode during a
system service.

4.13 Lower IRQL

The current IRQL can be lowered with the KeLowerIrql function:

VOID

KeLowerIrql (

IN KIRQL NewIrql

);

Parameters:

NewIrql - The new IRQL value.

If the new IRQL is greater than the current IRQL, then a bug check will
occur. Otherwise, the current IRQL is set to the specified value.

4.14 Query System Time

The current system time can be queried with the KeQuerySystemTime
function:

VOID

KeQuerySystemTime (

OUT PTIME CurrentTime

);

Parameters:

CurrentTime - A pointer to a variable that receives the current system
time.

This function returns the current system time in 100ns units. It is the
responsibility of the executive to maintain the correspondence between
system time and external time as seen by a user of the system.

4.15 Raise IRQL

The current IRQL can be raised with the KeRaiseIrql function:

KIRQL

KeRaiseIrql (

IN KIRQL NewIrql

);

Parameters:

NewIrql - The new IRQL value.

If the new IRQL is less than the current IRQL, then a bug check will
occur. Otherwise, the current IRQL is set to the specified value.

4.16 Run Down Thread

Data structures for the current thread that must be guarded by the
dispatcher database lock can be run down with the KeRundownThread
function:

VOID

KeRundownThread (

);

This function is intended for use just prior to terminating a thread. It
run downs appropriate data structures and performs operations necessary
to terminate the thread.

Operations performed include:

1. Processing of the mutant ownership list which causes each mutant
object owned by the current thread to be released with an abandoned
status.

4.17 Set System Time

The current system time can be set with the KeSetSystemTime function:

VOID

KeSetSystemTime (

IN PTIME NewTime,

OUT PTIME OldTime,

);

Parameters:

NewTime - A pointer to a variable that specifies the new system time.

OldTime - A pointer to a variable that receives the previous system
time.

This function returns the previous system time in 100ns units and sets
the system time to the specified value. It is the responsibility of the
executive to maintain the correspondence between system time and
external time as seen by a user of the system.

4.18 Stall Execution

The execution of the current processor can be stalled with the
KeStallExecutionProcessor function:

VOID

KeStallExecutionProcessor (

IN ULONG MicroSeconds

);

Parameters:

MicroSeconds - The number of microseconds for which execution is to be
stalled.

This function stalls the execution of the current processor by executing
a processor-dependent routine that busy waits at least the specified
number of microseconds, but not significantly longer.

This routine is intended for use by device drivers and other software
that must wait a short interval which is less than a clock tick, but
larger than a few instructions.

IMPLEMENTATION NOTES:

This function is guaranteed to busy wait for at least the number of
specified microseconds and is calibrated at system initialization. Long
intervals tend to be very accurate, whereas, short intervals may busy
wait for a period that is slightly longer than the specified number of
microseconds.

4.19 Unfreeze Execution

The execution of all other processors in a host configuration, excluding
the current processor, can be resumed with the KeUnfreezeExecution
function:

VOID

KeUnfreezeExecution (

IN KIRQL Irql

);

Parameters:

Irql - The previous IRQL value that is to be restored.

The execution of all processors in the system, excluding the current
processor, is unfrozen, the previous IRQL is restored, and the
instruction cache of each processor in the configuration is flushed.

This function is intended for use by system debuggers and should be
called when execution is to be continued after entering the debugger and
calling KeFreezeExecution function. Before the execution of an unfrozen
processor is continued, its instruction cache and translation buffer are
flushed.

5. Intel x86 Specific Functions.

There is a small set of special functions peculiar to the Intel x86
family of processors, which are necessary to fully exploit those
processors. These functions are used primarily to manipulate x86
specific control structures, such as the Ldt.

Programming interfaces:

Ke386SetLdtProcess - Set Ldt for a process

Ke386SetDescriptorProcess - Set entry in Ldt a process

5.1 Load an Ldt for a process.

An Ldt (Local Descriptor Table) can be made the active Ldt for a process
with Ke386SetLdtProcess:

VOID

Ke386SetLdtProcess (

PKPROCESS Process,

PLDT_ENTRY Ldt[],

ULONG Limit

);

Parameters:

Process - Pointer to KPROCESS object describing the process for which
the Ldt is to be set.

Ldt - Pointer to an array of LDT_ENTRYs (that is, a pointer to an Ldt.

Limit - Ldt limit (must be 0 mod 8)

The specified LDT (which may be null) will be made the active Ldt of the
specified process, for all threads thereof, on whichever processors they
are running. The change will take effect before the call returns.

An Ldt address of NULL or a Limit of 0 will cause the process to receive
the NULL Ldt.

This function only exists on i386 and i386 compatible processors.

No checking is done on the validity of Ldt entries.

IMPLEMENATION NOTES:

While a single Ldt structure can be shared among processes, any edits to
the Ldt of one of those processes will only be synchronized for that
process. Thus, processes other than the one the change is applied to may
not see the change correctly.

5.2 Set and Entry in a Process's Ldt.

An individual entry in the Ldt of a process may be edited with
Ke386SetDescriptorProcess:

VOID

Ke386SetDescriptorProcess (

PKPROCESS Process,

ULONG Offset,

LDT_ENTRY LdtEntry

);

Parameters:

Process - Pointer to KPROCESS object describing the process for which
the descriptor edit is to be performed.

Offset - Byte offset into the Ldt of the descriptor to edit. Must be 0
mod 8.

LdtEntry - Value to edit into the descriptor in hardware format. No
checking is done on the validity of this item.

The specified LdtEntry (which could be 0, not present, etc) will be
edited into the specified Offset in the Ldt of the specified Process.
This will be synchronized across all the processors executing the
process. The edit will take affect on all processors before the call
returns.

Get an Entry from a Thread's Gdt.

Get an Entry from a Thread's Gdt.

5.3 Get an Entry from a Thread's Gdt.

An individual entry in the Gdt of a thread may be obtained using
Ke386GetGdtEntryThread:

VOID

Ke386GetGdtEntryThread (

IN PKTHREAD Thread,

IN ULONG Offset,

IN PGDT_ENTRY Descriptor

);

Parameters:

Thread  Supplies a pointer to the thread from whose Gdt the entry is
to come.

Offset  Supplies the descriptor number of the descriptor to return.
This value must be 0 mod 8.

Descriptor  Returns the descriptor contents

The Gdt entry specified by Selector will be copied from the specified
thread's Gdt, into Descriptor.

For descriptors that don't exist when the thread is not running
(KGDT_R3_TEB, and KGDT_LDT), the descriptor values will be
"materialized".

For descriptors that are processor specific, rather than thread
specific, the current processor's value will be returned.

For all other Gdt descriptors, the descriptor will be copied from the
Gdt.

Revision History:

Original Draft 1.0, March 8, 1989

Revision 1.1, March 16, 1989

1. Add text to describe the muxwait object.

2. Add text to describe the interrupt object.

3. Add text to describe the power notify object.

4. Add text to describe the power status object.

5. Add text to describe the generic wait functions.

6. Addition of text to describe the miscellaneous functions.

7. Add text to overview of document.

Revision 1.2, March 29, 1989

1. Change KeDelayExecution to return a wait completion value.

2. Complete section on multiprocessor synchronization.

3. Complete section on device queue object.

4. Delete muxwait object and replace with a wait multiple function that
takes an array of pointer to dispatcher objects as a parameter.

Revision 1.3, April 18,1989

1. Alphabetically order section on miscellaneous functions.

2. Add KeBugCheck, KeLowerIrql, and KeRaiseIrql miscellaneous functions.

3. A thread will start execution at IRQL APC_LEVEL rather than with APCs
disabled.

4. Returning from the executive thread start up routine will cause a
thread to enter user mode provide that a user mode context was supplied
when the thread was initialized.

5. Add three parameters to thread initialization to optionally describe
user mode context.

6. Delete builtin user mode alert APC. Alerting a thread that is waiting
alertable causes a wait completion status of ALERTED to be returned.

7. Replace all reference to DPC_LEVEL with DISPATCH_LEVEL.

8. Put interrupt level names in hardware interrupt table.

9. Add pointers to the PRCB which point to the time expiration and power
notify DPC's that are system wide.

10. Change thread context to include ten pipeline state registers rather
than six.

11. Change KeResumeThread and KeSuspendThread to return a CHAR rather
than a UCHAR.

12. Delete voluntary and preemption wait counters from thread object.

13. Reduce number of APC and DPC system parameters to two.

14. If a device is Not-Busy, then release device queue spin lock but do
not lower IRQL before returning.

15. Allow interrupt service routine to user the floating point registers
for block moves and graphics functions.

16. If a thread is awakened to deliver a user mode APC, then return a
status of USER_APC.

Revision 1.4, May 4, 1989

1. Delete increment parameter from KeReleaseMutex.

2. Change Count and Limit parameters of KeInitializeSemaphore from ULONG
to LONG.

3. Change KeReadStateSemaphore to return a LONG rather than a ULONG.

4. Change KeReleaseSemaphore to return a LONG rather than a ULONG and
change the type of the Adjustment parameters from ULONG to LONG.

5. Set the value of a semaphore to the maximum value if an attempt is
made to adjust the count of a semaphore above the limit.

6. Add system startup routine to KeInitializeThread for executive level
initialization.

7. Change the wait functions to return NTSTATUS rather than ULONG.

8. Change the type of the WaitType parameter from KWAIT_TYPE to
WAIT_TYPE.

Revision 1.5, May 8, 1989

1. Change data type of the KeBugCheck parameter to ULONG.

2. Add Invalid parameter to KeFlushEntireTb and KeFlushSingleTb to allow
specification of why the flush is being performed.

Revision 1.6, August 14, 1989

1. General correction of typos and grammatical errors as suggested by
Helenc review. Clarification and rewrite of several sections.

2. Reorganization of section 1.0 with the deletion of redundant
information.

3. Added miscellaneous functions to get the previous processor mode, get
the current IRQL, and to set the current IRQL.

4. The interrupt object section was extensively rewritten to match the
actual implementation.

5. The time parameter in the KeDelayExecution function was changed to a
pointer to a time value.

Revision 1.7, November 15, 1989

1. Delete KeSetCurrentIrql function which was an optimization of the
KeRaiseIrql function that didn't require saving the old IRQL.

2. Add functions KeContextToKframes and KeContextFromKframes to move
information in the trap frame and the exception frame to/from the
context frame.

3. Add priority increment parameter to the KeInsertQueueApc function.

4. Change KeInitializeThread function to replace the optional trap and
exception frame parameters with an optional context frame argument. If
the context frame parameter is specified, then it is assumed that the
thread will execute in user mode.

5. Change KeAcquireSpinlock function to return the old IRQL as an output
parameter and delete the Wait parameter from the KeReleaseSpinlock
function.

6. Change KeInsertDeviceQueue and KeInsertByKeyDevice functions to
neither raise nor lower IRQL.

7. Split the event object into two types of event objects:
synchronization and notification.

8. Change the definition of the state of an event object to be a count.

9. Add a parameter to the KeInitializeApc function to specify the APC
execution environment. Add a function (KeGetApcEnvironment) that returns
the current APC environment.

Revision 1.8, November 16, 1989

1. Add optional parameter to KeWaitForMultipleObjects that allows more
than the builtin number of objects to be waited on concurrently.

2. Add abandoned return status from KeWaitForMultipleObjects when one or
more of the dispatcher objects satisfying the Wait is an abandoned
mutant object.

3. Add new mutant object which provides for user level mutexes. Add the
functions KeInitializeMutant, KeReadStateMutant, and KeReleaseMutant to
manipulate the mutant object.

Revision 1.9, November 17, 1989

1. Add KeRundownThread function to provide kernel thread rundown when a
thread is deleted.

2. Minor edits and corrections.

Revision 1.10, January 6, 1990

1. Change name of KeReadSystemTime to KeQuerySystemTime.

2. Add miscellaneous kernel function (KeSetSystemTime) to set the system
time.

Revision 1.11, June 6, 1990

1. Change text that explains how a binary semaphore can be used like a
synchronization event to include a statement that the semaphore cannot
be over Signaled.

2. Change the definition of KeInitializeSemaphore to omit any checks on
the limit and initial value of the semaphore.

3. Change the semantics of release semaphore such that an attempt to
over Signal the semaphore does not cause the current count to be set to
the maximum value. The current count remains unchanged and the exception
STATUS_SEMAPHORE_COUNT_EXCEEDED is raised.

4. Once set, the abandoned status of a mutant object cannot be cleared
and will continually be returned by the kernel wait services. The mutant
object, however, will continue to function and ownership can be
requested and released.

5. If an attempt is made to release a mutant object by a nonowner with
the Abandoned parameter FALSE, then either the exception
STATUS_ABANDONED or STATUS_MUTANT_NOT_OWNED will be raised.

6. Remove the hard assignment of Interrupt Request Levels (IRQL's) to
kernel functions and replace with symbolic assignments. Explain that
IRQL's are hierarchically ordered by priority.

7. Change the return type of KeResumeThread and KeSuspendThread to
ULONG.

8. An attempt to suspend a thread more than MAXIMUM_SUSPEND_COUNT times
causes the exception STATUS_SUSPEND_COUNT_EXCEEDED to be raised.

9. Add KeFreezeThread and KeUnfreezeThread functions to suspend and
resume a thread on behalf of the system. These functions are identical
to suspend and resume, but are not exported to user mode.

10. Add KeRundownThread function to run down appropriate kernel data
structures before thread termination.

11. Add KeStallExecution function to enable executive software to stall
execution for short periods of time.

12. Add KeFlushIoBuffers function to flush the memory region occupied by
an I/O buffer from the data and instruction caches.

13. Remove text that described the KeFlushIcache and KeFlushDcache
functions as intended for use in systems in which DMA I/O operations do
not invalidate caches.

14. Add KeFillEntryTb function to update TB entries in systems with
software-managed translation buffers.

15. Make explanation of thread context more general and not specific to
the Intel i860.

Revision 1.12, September 19, 1990 (Bryan Willman)

1. Add Profile object section.

Revision 1.13, March 11, 1991

1. Change the operation of the power notify object so that a DPC object
is not required and make the operation repeatable.

2. Add parameter to KeInitializeProcess to specific the default data
alignment handling mode for children threads.

3. Add KeSetAutoAlignmentThread and KeQueryAutoAlignmentThread functions
to set and query the data alignment handling mode of the current thread.

4. Change the name of the KeDelayExecution function to
KeDelayExecutionThread and move the explanatory text to the section on
thread objects.

5. Change the name of the KeStallExecution function to
KeStallExecutionProcessor.

6. Change REQUEST_LEVEL with IPI_LEVEL.

7. Add KeQueryBasePriorityThread and KeSetBasePriorityThread functions
to set and query the base priority of a thread object.

Revision 1.14, May 2, 1991

1. Add x86 specific section, Ke386SetLdtProcess and
Ke386SetDescriptorProcess.

Revision 1.15, May 28, 1991 (daveh)

1. Added Ke386GetThreadGdt

Revision 1.16, June 18, 1991 (bryanwi)

1. Added ShareVector parameter to KeInitializeInterrupt.

2. Applied spelling checker to document.

Revision 1.17, August 7, 1991 (shielint)

1. Made KeFlushSingleTb spec match reality

Revision 1.18, August 8, 1991 (bryanwi)

1. Removed coordinator, added SynchronizeIrql to KeInitializeInterrupt.
